Service without humility is selfishness and egotism."(:-;
Satisfaction lies in the effort, not in the attainment.
Hate the sin, love the sinner.
Strength does not come from physical capacity. It comes from an indomitable will.
What barrier is there that love cannot break?
Gentleness, self-sacrifice and generosity are the exclusive possession of no one race or religion.
A No uttered from deepest conviction is better and greater than a Yes merely uttered to please, or what is worse, to avoid trouble.
To lose patience is to lose the battle.
My faith is brightest in the midst of impenetrable darkness.
Truth without humility would be an arrogant caricature.
That service is the noblest which is rendered for its own sake.
You must not lose faith in humanity. Humanity is an ocean; if a few drops of the ocean are dirty, the ocean does not become dirty.
There is nothing that wastes the body like worry, and one who has any faith in God should be ashamed to worry about anything whatsoever.
The real ornament of woman is her character, her purity.
It is the quality of our work which will please God and not the quantity.
Nonviolence is a weapon of the strong.
The only tyrant I accept in this world is the still voice within.
The weak can never forgive. Forgiveness is the attribute of the strong.
Take care of this moment.
Doubt is invariably the result of want or weakness of faith.
True beauty consists of purity of heart.
Healthy discontent is the prelude to progress.
Imitation is the sincerest flattery.
Fear has its use but cowardice has none.
Full effort is full victory.
I am a humble but very earnest seeker after truth.
A small body of determined spirits fired by an unquenchable faith in their mission can alter the course of history.
Truth resides in every human heart, and one has to search for it there, and to be guided by truth as one sees it. But no one has a right to coerce others to act according to his own view of truth.
What is true of the individual will be tomorrow true of the whole nation if individuals will but refuse to lose heart and hope.
Unwearied ceaseless effort is the price that must be paid for turning faith into a rich infallible experience.
Everyone who wills can hear the inner voice. It is within everyone.
Freedom is not worth having if it does not connote freedom to err.
There is no principle worth the name if it is not wholly good.
A principle is the expression of perfection, and as imperfect beings like us cannot practise perfection, we devise every moment limits of its compromise in practice.
Rationalists are admirable beings, rationalism is a hideous monster when it claims for itself omnipotence. Attribution of omnipotence to reason is as bad a piece of idolatry as is worship of stock and stone believing it to be God.
I do not believe that multiplication of wants and machinery contrived to supply them is taking the world a single step nearer its goal I whole-heartedly detest this mad desire to destroy distance and time, to increase animal appetites and go to the ends of the earth in search of their satisfaction. If modern civilization stands for all this, and I have understood it to do so, I call it Satanic.
Before the throne of the Almighty, man will be judged not by his acts but by his intentions. For God alone reads our hearts.
I do all the evil I can before I learn to shun it? Is it not enough to know the evil to shun it? If not, we should be sincere enough to admit that we love evil too well to give it up.
I have also seen children successfully surmounting the effects of an evil inheritance. That is due to purity being an inherent attribute of the soul.
The rich cannot accumulate wealth without the co-operation of the poor in society.
The human voice can never reach the distance that is covered by the still small voice of conscience.
It is health that is real wealth and not pieces of gold and silver.
Do not judge others. Be your own judge and you will be truly happy. If you will try to judge others, you are likely to burn your fingers.
Capital as such is not evil; it is its wrong use that is evil. Capital in some form or other will always be needed.
Man often becomes what he believes himself to be. If I keep on saying to myself that I cannot do a certain thing, it is possible that I may end by really becoming incapable of doing it.
If I have the belief that I can do it, I shall surely acquire the capacity to do it even if I may not have it at the beginning.
Morality which depends upon the helplessness of a man or woman has not much to recommend it. Morality is rooted in the purity of our hearts.
Just as a man would not cherish living in a body other than his own, so do nations not like to live under other nations, however noble and great the latter may be.
Increase of material comforts, it may be generally laid down, does not in any way whatsoever conduce to moral growth.
A man of few words will rarely be thoughtless in his speech; he will measure every word.
Anger and intolerance are the enemies of correct understanding.
If your heart acquires strength, you will be able to remove blemishes from others without thinking evil of them.
The golden rule to apply in all such cases is resolutely to refuse to have what millions cannot.
A man who was completely innocent, offered himself as a sacrifice for the good of others, including his enemies, and became the ransom of the world. It was a perfect act.
I believe that the sum total of the energy of mankind is not to bring us down but to lift us up, and that is the result of the definite, if unconscious, working of the law of love.
Power is of two kinds. One is obtained by the fear of punishment and the other by acts of love. Power based on love is a thousand times more effective and permanent then the one derived from fear of punishment.
Interdependence is and ought to be as much the ideal of man as self-sufficiency. Man is a social being.
Love is the strongest force the world possesses and yet it is the humblest imaginable.
America aims at having a car for every citizen. I do not.
I cannot conceive of a greater loss than the loss of ones self-respect.
Nonviolence is impossible without humility.
Always aim at complete harmony of thought and word and deed. Always aim at purifying your thoughts and everything will be well.
The less you possess, the less you want, the better you are. And better for what? Not for enjoyment of this life, but for enjoyment of personal service to the fellow-beings; service which you dedicate yourself, body, soul and mind.
There is really no slavery equal to that of the desires. All the sages have declared from the house-tops that man can be his own worst enemy as well as his best friend. To be free or to be a slave lies in his own hands. And what is true for the individual is true for society.
He who would sacrifice his life for others has hardly time to reserve for himself a place in the sun.
I know that I have still before me a difficult path to traverse. I must reduce myself to zero. So long as a man does not of his own free will put himself last among his fellow creatures, there is no salvation for him. Ahimsa is the farthest limit of humility.
There is an orderliness in the universe, there is an unalterable law governing everything and every being that exists or lives. It is no blind law; for no blind law can govern the conduct of living beings.
One, who abandons all desires, is free from pride and selfishness and behaves as one apart, finds peace.
Providence has its appointed hour for everything. We cannot command results, we can only strive.
I do not want to foresee the future. I am concerned with taking care of the present. God has given me no control over the moment following.
In matters of conscience, the law of the majority has no place.
Freedom is never dear at any price. It is the breath of life. What would a man not pay for living?
Truth never damages a cause that is just.
A man of truth must also be a man of care.
In judging myself I shall try to be as harsh as truth, as I want others also to be.
Morality is the basis of things and truth is the substance of all morality.
The seeker after truth should be humbler than the dust. The world crushes the dust under its feet, but the seeker after truth should so humble himself that even the dust could crush him. Only then, and not till then, will he have a glimpse of truth.
Truth is by nature self-evident. As soon as you remove the cobwebs of ignorance that surround it, it shines clear.
What is Truth? A difficult question; but I have solved it for myself by saying that it is what the voice within tells you.
All that I can in true humility present to you is that Truth is not to be found by anybody who has not got an abundant sense of humility. If you would swim on the bosom of the ocean of Truth you must reduce yourself to zero.
But it is impossible for us to realize perfect truth so long as we are imprisoned in this mortal frame.
Truth alone will endure, all the rest will be swept away before the tide of time.
Silence becomes cowardice when occasion demands speaking out the whole truth and acting accordingly.
The pursuit of truth does not permit violence on ones opponent.
It has often occurred to me that a seeker after Truth has to be silent.
In the midst of death life persists.
A courageous man prefers death to the surrender of self-respect.
Fear of death makes us devoid both of valour and religion. For want of valour is want of religious faith.
Man lives freely only by his readiness to die, if need be, at the hands of his brother, never by killing him.
If we weep for all the deaths in our country, the tears in our eyes would never dry.
I came alone in this world, I have walked alone in the valley of the shadow of death, and I shall quit alone when the time comes.
Where death without resistance or death after resistance is the only way, neither party should think of resorting to law-courts or help from the government.
The wise are unaffected either by death or life. These are but faces of the same coin.
To die in the act of killing is, in essence, to die defeated.
What is imprisonment to the man who is fearless of death itself?
Unity to be real must stand the severest strain without breaking.
The golden way is to be friends with the world and to regard the whole human family as one.
There is no occasion for women to consider themselves subordinate or inferior to men.
Justice that love gives is a surrender, justice that law gives is a punishment.
A man must arrange his physical and cultural circumstances so that they do not hinder him in his service of humanity, on which all his energies should be concentrated.
A living faith in God means acceptance of the brotherhood of mankind.
I believe in the essential unity of all people and for that matter of all lives. Therefore, I believe that if one person gains spiritually, the whole world gains, and if one person falls, the whole world falls to that extent.
Mankind is notoriously too dense to read the signs that God sends from time to time. We require drums to be beaten into our ears, before we should wake from our trance and hear the warning and see that to lose oneself in all, is the only way to find oneself.
Each one has to find his peace from within. And peace to be real must be unaffected by outside circumstances.
When restraint and courtesy are added to strength, the latter becomes irresistible.
The law of sacrifice is uniform throughout the world. To be effective it demands the sacrifice of the bravest and the most spotless.
Service which is rendered without joy helps neither the servant nor the served. But all other pleasures and possessions pale into nothingness before service which is rendered in a spirit of joy.
Measures must always in a progressive society be held superior to men, who are after all imperfect instruments, working for their fulfilment.
It has always been a mystery to me how men can feel themselves honoured by the humiliation of their fellow beings.
If we are to teach real peace in this world, and if we are to carry on a real war against war, we shall have to begin with the children.
Woman is the companion of man, gifted with equal mental capacity.
We win justice quickest by rendering justice to the other party.
No culture can live, if it attempts to be exclusive.
Its my conviction that nothing enduring can be built on violence.
Nonviolence is not a garment to be put on and off at will. Its seat is in the heart, and it must be an inseparable part of our being.
Nonviolence, which is the quality of the heart, cannot come by an appeal to the brain.
Non-cooperation with evil is as much a duty as is cooperation with good.
Non-cooperation is a measure of discipline and sacrifice, and it demands respect for the opposite views.
If co-operation is a duty, I hold that non-co-operation also under certain conditions is equally a duty.
We should meet abuse by forbearance. Human nature is so constituted that if we take absolutely no notice of anger or abuse, the person indulging in it will soon weary of it and stop.
Violent means will give violent freedom. That would be a menace to the world and to India herself.
To deprive a man of his natural liberty and to deny to him the ordinary amenities of life is worse then starving the body; it is starvation of the soul, the dweller in the body.
I object to violence because when it appears to do good, the good is only temporary, the evil it does is permanent.
Intolerance is itself a form of violence and an obstacle to the growth of a true democratic spirit.
Nonviolence is the first article of my faith. It is also the last article of my creed.
Victory attained by violence is tantamount to a defeat, for it is momentary.
Violence is a concession to human weakness, satyagraha is an obligation.
To forget how to dig the earth and to tend the soil is to forget ourselves.
The purpose of life is undoubtedly to know oneself. We cannot do it unless we learn to identify ourselves with all that lives. The sum-total of that life is God.
I want to realize brotherhood or identity not merely with the beings called human, but I want to realize identity with all life, even with such things as crawl upon earth.
I hold flesh-food to be unsuited to our species. We err in copying the lower animal world if we are superior to it.
Human nature will find itself only when it fully realizes that to be human it has to cease to be beastly or brutal.
When I see a cow, it is not an animal to eat, it is a poem of pity for me and I worship it and I shall defend its worship against the whole world.
Every man has an equal right to the necessaries of life even as birds and beasts have.
I submit that scientists have not yet explored the hidden possibilities of the innumerable seeds, leaves and fruits for giving the fullest possible nutrition to mankind.
To my mind, the life of a lamb is no less precious than that of a human being.
Cow-slaughter and man-slaughter are in my opinion two sides of the same coin.
Responsibility will mellow and sober the youth and prepare them, for the burden they must discharge.
Real education has to draw out the best from the boys and girls to be educated. This can never be done by packing ill-assorted and unwanted information into the heads of the pupils. It becomes a dead weight crushing all originality in them and turning them into mere automata.
An intellect that is developed through the medium of socially useful labour will be an instrument for service and will not easily be led astray or fall into devious paths.
Purity of personal life is the one indispensable condition for building up a sound education.
Given the right kind of teachers, our children will be taught the dignity of labour and learn to regard it as an integral part and a means of their intellectual growth, and to realize that it is patriotic to pay for their training through their labour.
It is for you and me to show that no vice is inherent in man.
Education must be of a new type for the sake of the creation of a new world.
If teachers impart all the knowledge in the world to their students but inculcate not truth and purity among them, they will have betrayed them and instead of raising them set them on the downward road to perdition.
Knowledge without character is a power for evil only, as seen in the instances of so many talented thieves and gentlemen rascals in the world.
Persistent questioning and healthy inquisitiveness are the first requisite for acquiring learning of any kind.
There can be no knowledge without humility and the will to learn.
You have to train the boys in one occupation or another. Round this special occupation you will train up his mind, his body, his handwriting, his artistic sense, and so on. He will be master of the craft he learns.
If India is not to declare spiritual bankruptcy, religious instruction of its youth must be held to be at least as necessary as secular instruction.
Man will ever remain imperfect, and it will always be his part to try to be perfect.
There will have to be rigid and iron discipline before we achieve anything great and enduring, and that discipline will not come by mere academic argument and appeal to reason and logic. Discipline is learnt in the school of adversity.
An ounce of practice is worth more than tons of preaching.
Culture of the mind must be subservient to the heart.
Moral authority is never retained by any attempt to hold on to it. It comes without seeking and is retained without effort.
Let us all be brave enough to die the death of a martyr, but let no one lust for martyrdom.
There is nothing more potent than thought. Deed follows word and word follows thought. The word is the result of a mighty thought, and where the thought is mighty and pure the result is always mighty and pure.
It is my own firm belief that the strength of the soul grows in proportion as you subdue the flesh.
For me every ruler is alien that defies public opinion.
I want freedom for the full expression of my personality.
No man loses his freedom except through his own weakness.
Men aspiring to be free can hardly think of enslaving others.
A leader is useless when he acts against the promptings of his own conscience.
Man has always desired power. Ownership of property gives this power. Man hankers also after posthumous fame based on power.
Some form of common worship and a common place of worship appear to be a human necessity.
The difficulty one experiences in meeting himsa arises from weakness of mind.
It is weakness which breeds fear, and fear breeds distrust.
The best way of losing a cause is to abuse your opponent and to trade upon his weakness.
Life is an aspiration. Its mission is to strive after perfection, which is self-realization. The ideal must not be lowered because of our weaknesses or imperfections.
A definite forgiveness would mean a definite recognition of our strength.
If we were strong, self-respecting and not susceptible to frightfulness, the foreign rulers would have been powerless for mischief.
The greater our innocence, the greater our strength and the swifter our victory.
If patience is worth anything, it must endure to the end of time. And a living faith will last in the midst of the blackest storm.
I claim to be a simple individual liable to err like any other fellow mortal. I own, however, that I have humility enough to confess my errors and to retrace my steps.
I believe that a man is the strongest soldier for daring to die unarmed.
If your heart acquires strength, you will be able to remove blemishes from others without thinking evil of them.
It is difficult, but not impossible, to conduct strictly honest business.
I regard myself as a soldier, though a soldier of peace.
The human body is meant solely for service, never for indulgence. The secret of happy life lies in renunciation. Renunciation is life. Indulgence spells death.
He who runs to the doctor, vaidya, or hakim for every little ailment, and swallows all kinds of vegetable and mineral drugs, not only curtails his life, but by becoming the slave of his body instead of remaining its master, loses self-control, and ceases to be a man.
Not to have control over the senses is like sailing in a rudderless ship, bound to break to pieces on coming in contact with the very first rock.
Not until we have reduced ourselves to nothingness can we conquer the evil in us. God demands nothing less than complete self-surrender as the price for the only real freedom that is worth having.
Good government is no substitute for self-government.
The spirit of democracy cannot be imposed from without. It has to come from within.
Civil disobedience becomes a sacred duty when the state becomes lawless or corrupt.
Among the many misdeeds of British rule in India, history will look upon the Act depriving a whole nation of arms as the blackest.
Corruption and hypocrisy ought not to be inevitable products of democracy, as they undoubtedly are today.
So far as I can see the atomic bomb has deadened the finest feeling that has sustained mankind for ages.
Those who say religion has nothing to do with politics do not know what religion is.
Terrorism and deception are weapons not of the strong, but of the weak.
A good person will resist an evil system with his whole soul. Disobedience of the laws of an evil state is therefore a duty.
It is derogatory to the dignity of mankind, it is derogatory to the dignity of India, to entertain for one single moment hatred towards Englishmen.
A democrat must be utterly selfless. He must think and dream not in terms of self or of party, but only of democracy.
A policy is a temporary creed liable to be changed, but while it holds good it has got to be pursued with apostolic zeal.
To safeguard democracy the people must have a keen sense of independence, self-respect, and their oneness.
The spirit of democracy cannot be established in the midst of terrorism, whether governmental or popular.
What difference does it make to the dead, the orphans and the homeless, whether the mad destruction is wrought under the name of totalitarianism or the holy name of liberty or democracy?
An unjust law is itself a species of violence. Arrest for its breach is more so.
The spirit of democracy is not a mechanical thing to be adjusted by abolition of forms. It requires change of heart.
In reality there are as many religions as there are individuals.
The dignity of man requires obedience to a higher law, to the strength of the spirit.
For me, the different religions are beautiful flowers from the same garden, or they are branches of the same majestic tree. Therefore, they are equally true, though being received and interpreted through human instruments equally imperfect.
Every formula of every religion has in this age of reason, to submit to the acid test of reason and universal assent.
Hinduism insists on the brotherhood of not only all mankind but of all that lives.
All the religions of the world, while they may differ in other respects, unitedly proclaim that nothing lives in this world but Truth.
I reject any religious doctrine that does not appeal to reason and is in conflict with morality.
Spiritual relationship is far more precious than physical. Physical relationship divorced from spiritual is body without soul.
I believe in the fundamental truth of all great religions of the world.
God sometimes does try to the uttermost those whom he wishes to bless.
Faith becomes lame, when it ventures into matters pertaining to reason.
A vow is a purely religious act which cannot be taken in a fit of passion. It can be taken only with a mind purified and composed and with God as witness.
Only he can take great resolves who has indomitable faith in God and has fear of God.
Though we may know Him by a thousand names, He is one and the same to us all.
For me the voice of God, of Conscience, of Truth or the Inner Voice or the still small Voice mean one and the same thing.
I worship God as Truth only. I have not yet found Him, but I am seeking after Him.
But for my faith in God, I should have been a raving maniac.
Cultivation of tolerance for other faiths will impart to us a truer understanding of our own.
One needs to be slow to form convictions, but once formed they must be defended against the heaviest odds.
God is, even though the whole world deny him. Truth stands, even if there be no public support. It is self-sustained.
God, as Truth, has been for me a treasure beyond price. May He be so to every one of us.
In prayer it is better to have a heart without words than words without a heart.
Close the day with prayer so that you may have a peaceful night free from dreams and nightmares.
Prayer needs no speech. It is in itself independent of any sensuous effort. But it must be combined with the utmost humility.
Let everyone try and find that as a result of daily prayer he adds something new to his life, something with which nothing can be compared.
I can give my own testimony and say that a heartfelt prayer is undoubtedly the most potent instrument that man possesses for overcoming cowardice and all other bad old habits.
As food is necessary for the body, prayer is necessary for the soul. A man may be able to do without food for a number of days  as MacSwiney did for over 70 days  but believing in God, man cannot, should not, live a moment without prayer.
I believe that prayer is the very soul and essence of religion, and therefore prayer must be the very core of life of man, for no man can live without religion.
When every hope is gone, 'when helpers fail and comforts flee,' I find that help arrives somehow, from I know not where. Supplication, worship, prayer are no superstition; they are acts more real than the acts of eating, drinking, sitting or walking. It is no exaggeration to say that they alone are real, all else is unreal.
What barrier is there that love cannot break?
The seeker after truth should be humbler than the dust. The world crushes the dust under its feet, but the seeker after truth should so humble himself that even the dust could crush him. Only then, and not till then, will he have a glimpse of truth.
But you can wake a man only if he is really asleep. No effort that you make will produce any effect upon him if he is merely pretending sleep.
Truth has drawn me into the field of politics; and I can say without the slightest hesitation, and yet in all humility, that those who say that religion has nothing to do with politics do not know what religion means.
I appeal for cessation of hostilities, not because you are too exhausted to fight, but because war is bad in essence. You want to kill Nazism. You will never kill it by its indifferent adoption.
Service without humility is selfishness and egotism.
It is also a warning. It is a warning that, if nobody reads the writing on the wall, man will be reduced to the state of the beast, whom he is shaming by his manners.
Human language can but imperfectly describe God's ways. I am sensible of the fact that they are indescribable and inscrutable. But if mortal man will dare to describe them, he has no better medium than his own inarticulate speech.
Our duty is very simple and plain. We want to serve the community, and in our own humble way to serve the Empire. We believe in the righteousness of the cause, which it is our privilege to espouse. We have an abiding faith in the mercy of the Almighty God, and we have firm faith in the British Constitution. That being so, we should fail in our duty if we wrote anything with a view to hurt.
No matter how explicit the pledge, people will turn and twist the text to suit their own purpose
Purification being highly infectious, purification of oneself necessarily leads to the purification of one's surroundings.
I have called her beautiful, because it was her moral beauty that at once attracted me. True beauty after all consists in purity of heart.
service can have no meaning unless one takes pleasure in it. When it is done for show or for fear of public opinion, it stunts the man and crushes his spirit. Service which is rendered without joy helps neither the servant nor the served.
There are innumerable definitions of God, because His manifestations are innumerable.
In the very first month of Indian Opinion, I realized that the sole aim of journalism should be service. The newspaper press is a great power, but just as an unchained torrent of water submerges whole countrysides and devastates crops, even so an uncontrolled pen serves but to destroy. If the control is from without, it proves more poisonous than want of control. It can be profitable only when exercised from within. If this line of reasoning is correct, how many of the journals in the world would stand the test? But who would stop those that are useless? And who should be the judge? The useful and the useless must, like good and evil generally, go on together, and man must make his choice.
I think it is wrong to expect certainties in this world, where all else but God that is Truth is an uncertainty. All that appears and happens about and around us is uncertain, transient. But there is a Supreme Being hidden therein as a Certainty, and one would be blessed if one could catch a glimpse of that Certainty and hitch one's waggon to it. The quest for that Truth is the summum bonum of life.
No reform is possible unless some of the educated and the rich voluntarily accept the status of the poor, travel third, refuse to enjoy the amenities denied to the poor, and instead of taking avoidable hardships, discourtesies, and injustice as a matter of course, fight for their removal.
My difficulties lay deeper. It was more than I could believe that Jesus was the only incarnate son of God, and that only he who believed in him would have everlasting life. If God could have sons, all of us were His sons. If Jesus was like God, or God Himself, then all men were like God and could be God Himself. My reason was not ready to believe literally that Jesus by his death and by his blood redeemed the sins of the world. Metaphorically there might be some truth in it. Again, according to Christianity only human beings had souls, and not other living beings, for whom death meant complete extinction; while I held a contrary belief. I could accept Jesus as a martyr, an embodiment of sacrifice, and a divine teacher, but not as the most perfect man ever born. His death on the Cross was a great example to the world, but that there was anything like a mysterious or miraculous virtue in it my heart could not accept. The pious lives of Christians did not give me anything that the lives of men of other faiths had failed to give. I had seen in other lives just the same reformation that I had heard of among Christians. Philosophically there was nothing extraordinary in Christian principles. From the point of view of sacrifice, it seemed to me that the Hindus greatly surpassed the Christians. It was impossible for me to regard Christianity as a perfect religion or the greatest of all religions.
Renunciation of objects, without the renunciation of desires, is short-lived, however hard you may try.
While in Bombay, I began, on one hand, my study of Indian law and, on the other, my experiments in dietetics in which Virchand Gandhi, a friend, joined me. My brother, for his part was trying his best to get me briefs. The study of India law was a tedious business. The Civil Procedure Code I could in no way get on with. Not so however, with the Evidence Act. Virchand Gandhi was reading for the Solicitor's Examination and would tell me all sorts of stories about Barristers and Vakils.
Proneness to exaggerate, to suppress or modify the truth, wittingly or unwittingly, is a natural weakness of man and silence is necessary in order to surmount it.
For a bowl of water give a goodly meal; For a kindly greeting bow thou down with zeal; For a simple penny pay thou back with gold; If thy life be rescued, life do not withhold. Thus the words and actions of the wise regard; Every little service tenfold they reward. But the truly noble know all men as one, And return with gladness good for evil done.
If physical fasting is not accompanied by mental fasting it is bound to end in hypocrisy and disaster.
It was not easy to commit suicide as to contemplate it.
The real seat of taste was not the tongue but the mind
It was only in South Africa that I got over this shyness, though I never completely overcame it. It was impossible for me to speak impromptu. I hesitated whenever I had to face strange audiences and avoided making a speech whenever I could. Even today I do not think I could or would even be inclined to keep a meeting of friends engaged in idle talk.I must say that, beyond occasionally exposing me to laughter, my constitutional shyness has been no disadvantage whatever. In fact I can see that, on the contrary, it has been all to my advantage. My hesitancy in speech, which was once an annoyance, is now a pleasure. Its greatest benefit has been that it has taught me the economy of words. I have naturally formed the habit of restraining my thoughts. And I can now give myself the certificate that a thoughtless word hardly ever escapes my tongue or pen. I do not recollect ever having had to regret anything in my speech or writing. I have thus been spared many a mishap and waste of time. Experience has taught me that silence is part of the spiritual discipline of a votary of truth. Proneness to exaggerate, to suppress or modify the truth, wittingly or unwittingly, is a natural weakness of man, and silence is necessary in order to surmount it. A man of few words will rarely be thoughtless in his speech; he will measure every word. We find so many people impatient to talk. There is no chairman of a meeting who is not pestered with notes for permission to speak. And whenever the permission is given the speaker generally exceeds the time-limit, asks for more time, and keeps on talking without permission. All this talking can hardly be said to be of any benefit to the world. It is so much waste of time. My shyness has been in reality my shield and buckler. It has allowed me to grow. It has helped me in my discernment of truth.
A man of few words will rarely be thoughtless in his speech; he will measure every word.
Only this much I knew - that under ideal conditions, true education could be imparted only by the parents, and that then there should be the minimum of outside help.
Finally, this is better, that one do His own task as he may, even though he fail, Than take tasks not his own, though they seem good. To die performing duty is no ill; But who seeks other roads shall wander still.
About the same time I came in contact with another Christian family. At their suggestion I attended the Wesleyan church every Sunday. For these days I also had their standing invitation to dinner. The church did not make a favourable impression on me. The sermons seemed to be uninspiring. The congregation did not strike me as being particularly religious. They were not an assembly of devout souls; they appeared rather to be wordly-minded people, going to church for recreation and in conformity to custom. Here, at times, I would involuntarily doze. I was ashamed, but some of my neighbours, who were in no better case, lightened the shame. I could not go on long like this, and soon gave up attending the service.
Truth is like a vast tree, which yields more and more fruit, the more you nurture it. The deeper the search in the mine of truth the richer the discovery of the gems buried there, in the shape of openings for an ever greater variety of service.
I felt that God could be realized only through service. And service for me was the service of India, because it came to me without my seeking, because I had an aptitude for it.
The face of Truth is hidden behind the golden veil of maya, says the Upanishad.
When the fear of jail disappears, repression puts heart into the people.
Doubt is invariably the result of want or weakness of faith.
Nothing once begun should be abandoned, unless it is proved to be morally wrong.
Let every youth take a leaf out of my book and make it a point to account for everything that comes into and goes out of his pocket, and like me he is sure to be a gainer in the end.
How was one to treat alike insulting, insolent and corrupt officials, co-workers of yesterday raising meaningless opposition, and men who had always been good to one?
To my mind the life of a lamb is no less precious than that of a human being. I should be unwilling to take the life of a lamb for the sake of the human body. I
But truth is hard as adamant and tender as a blossom.
But the fact that I had learnt to be tolerant to other religions did not mean that I had any living faith in God.
That the good of the individual is contained in the good of all. (2) That a lawyers work has the same value as the barbers inasmuch as all have the same right of earning their livelihood from their work. (3) That a life of labour, i.e., the life of the tiller of the soil and the handicraftsman is the life worth living.
It has always been a mystery to me how men can feel themselves honoured by the humiliation of their fellow-beings.
I have always felt that the true text-book for the pupil is his teacher
I am now of the opinion that children should first be taught the art of drawing before learning how to write.
One of the objects of a newspaper is to understand popular feeling and to give expression to it; another is to arouse among the people certain desirable sentiments; and the third is fearlessly to expose popular defects.
As a rule I had a distaste for any reading beyond my school books.
To see the universal and all-pervading Spirit of Truth face to face one must be able to love the meanest of creation as oneself.
The deeper the search in the mine of truth the richer the discovery of the gems buried there
The more I reflect and look back on the past, the more vividly do I feel my limitations.
The useful and the useless must, like good and evil generally, go on together, and man must make his choice.
As the elephant is powerless to think in the terms of the ant, in spite of the best intentions in the world, even so is the Englishman powerless to think in the terms of, or legislate for, the Indian.
I have known only one way of carrying on missionary work, viz., by personal example and discussion with searchers for knowledge.
The newspaper press is a great power, but just as an unchained torrent of water submerges whole countrysides and devastates crops, even so an uncontrolled pen serves but to destroy. If
And now after considerable experience with the many public institutions which I have managed, it has become my firm conviction that it is not good to run public institutions on permanent funds. A permanent fund carries in itself the seed of the moral fall of the institution. A public institution means an institution conducted with the approval, and from the funds, of the public. When such an institution ceases to have public support, it forfeits its right to exist. Institutions maintained on permanent funds are often found to ignore public opinion, and are frequently responsible for acts contrary to it. In our country we experience this at every step. Some of the so-called religious trusts have ceased to render any accounts.
A reformer cannot afford to have close intimacy with him whom he seeks to reform. True friendship is an identity of souls rarely to be found in this world.
To attain to perfect purity one has to become absolutely passion-free in thought, speech and action; to rise above the opposing currents of love and hatred, attachment and repulsion.
All that appears and happens about and around us is uncertain, transient. But there is a Supreme Being hidden therein as a Certainly, and one would be blessed if one could catch a glimpse of that Certainty and hitch ones waggon to it. The quest for that Truth is the summum bonum of life.
Kaka (literally, paternal uncle).
Mama (literally, maternal uncle),
My experience has shown me that we win justice quickest by rendering justice to the other party.
Scatter her enemies, And make them fall; Confound their politics, Frustrate their knavish tricks.
It was with some difficulty that I got through the multiplication tables. The fact that I recollect nothing more of those days than having learnt, in company with other boys, to call our teacher all kinds of names, would strongly suggest that my intellect must have been sluggish, and my memory raw.
Words like aparigraha (non-possession) and samabhava (equability) gripped me. How to cultivate and preserve that equability was the question.
understood more clearly in the light of the Gita teaching the implication of the word trustee.
Hate the sin and not the sinner' is a precept which, though easy enough to understand, is rarely practised, and that is why the poison of hatred spreads in the world.
My regard for jurisprudence increased, I discovered in it religion. I understood the Gita teaching of non-possession to mean that those who desired salvation should act like the trustee who, though having control over great possessions, regards not an iota of them as his own.
I simply want to tell the story of my numerous experiments with Truth, and as my life consists of nothing but those experiments; it is true that the story will take the shape of an autobiography.
I had always heard the merchants say that truth was not possible in business. I did not think so then, nor do I now. Even today there are merchant friends who contend that truth is inconsistent with business. Business, they say, is a very practical affair, and truth a matter of religion; and they argue that practical affairs are one thing, while religion is quite another. Pure truth, they hold, is out of the question in business; one can speak it only as far as is suitable.
For a bowl of water give a goodly meal:   For a kindly greeting bow thou down with zeal:   For a simple penny pay thou back with gold:   If thy life be rescued, life do not withhold.   Thus the words and actions of the wise regard;   Every little service tenfold they reward.   But the truly noble know all men as one,   And return with gladness good for evil done.
One should eat not in order to please the palate, but just to keep the body going.
I shall think myself blessed only when I see Him in every one of my daily acts; Verily He is the thread which supports Muktanand's life.
Today I know that physical training should have as much place in the curriculum as mental training.
It has always been my conviction that Indian parents who train their children to think and talk in English from their infancy betray their children and their country. They
had read the laws, but not learnt how to practise law.
Numerous examples have convinced me that God ultimately saves him whose motive is pure.
Besides, I had learnt nothing at all of Indian law. I had not the slightest idea of Hindu and Mahomedan Law. I had not even learnt how to draft a plaint, and felt completely at sea. I had heard of Sir Pherozeshah Mehta as one who roared like a lion in law courts. How, I wondered, could he have learnt the art in England?
Service which is rendered without joy helps neither the servant nor the served. But all other pleasures and possessions pale into nothingness before service which is rendered in a spirit of joy.
To see Gokhale at work was as much a joy as an education. He never wasted a minute. His private relations and friendships were all for public good. All his talks had reference only to the good of the country and were absolutely free from any trace of untruth or insincerity.
Facts mean truth, and once we adhere to truth, the law comes to our aid naturally.
With my meagre knowledge of my own religion i do not want to belong to any religious body
The terrible sacrifice offered to Kali in the name of religion enhanced my desire to know Bengali
So long as a man does not of his own free will put himself last among his fellow creatures, there is no salvation for him. Ahimsa is the farthest limit of humility.
So long as a man does not of his own free will put himself last among his fellow creatures, there is no salvation for him.
Words like aparigraha (non-possession) and samabhava (equability) gripped me. How to cultivate and preserve that equability was the question. How was one to treat alike insulting, insolent and corrupt officials, co-workers of yesterday raising meaningless opposition, and men who had always been good to one? How was one to divest oneself of all possessions? Was not the body itself possession enough? Were not wife and children possessions? Was I to destroy all the cupboards of books I had? Was I to give up all I had and follow Him? Straight came the answer: I could not follow Him unless I gave up all I had.
The indifference of the railway authorities to the comforts of the third-class passengers, combined with the dirty and inconsiderate habits of the passengers themselves, makes third-class travelling a trial for a passenger of cleanly ways.
Who can say thus far, no further, to the tide of his own nature? Who can erase the impressions with which he is born? It is idle to expect ones children and wards necessarily to follow the same course of evolution as oneself.
These unpleasant habits commonly include throwing of rubbish on the floor of the compartment, smoking at all hours and in all places, betel and tobacco chewing, converting of the whole carriage into a spittoon, shouting and yelling, and using foul language, regardless of the convenience or comfort of fellow-passengers.
I believed then, and I believe even now, that, no matter what amount of work one has, one should always find some time for exercise, just as one does for one's meals. It is my humble opinion that, far from taking away from one's capacity for work, it adds to it.
bad handwriting should be regarded as a sign of an imperfect education.
I recall having read, at the brothers' instance, Madame Blavatsky's Key to Theosophy. This book stimulated in me the desire to read books on Hinduism, and disabused me of the notion fostered by the missionaries that Hinduism was rife with superstition.
Let every young man and woman be warned by my example, and understand that good handwriting is a necessary part of education. I am now of the opinion that children should first be taught the art of drawing before learning how to write. Let the child learn his letters by observation as he does different objects, such as flowers, birds, etc., and let him learn handwriting only after he has learnt to draw objects. He will then write a beautifully formed hand.
But all my life through, the very insistence on truth has taught me to appreciate the beauty of compromise.
True beauty after all consists in purity of heart. With
Where is there a wretch So wicked and loathsome as I? I have forsaken my Maker, So faithless have I been.
I saw that a man of truth must also be a man of care.
The hearts earnest and pure desire is always fulfilled. In my own experience I have often seen this rule verified.
To my mind the life of a lamb is no less precious than that of a human being. I should be unwilling to take the life of a lamb for the sake of the human body. I hold that, the more helpless a creature, the more entitled it is to protection by man from the cruelty of man.
I could not swallow this. I told him that, if the sheep had speech, they would tell a different tale. I felt that the cruel custom ought to be stopped. I thought of the story of Buddha, but I also saw that the task was beyond my capacity. I hold today the same opinion as I held then. To my mind the life of a lamb is no less precious than that of a human being. I should be unwilling to take the life of a lamb for the sake of the human body. I hold that, the more helpless a creature, the more entitled it is to protection by man from the cruelty of man. But he who has not qualified himself for such service is unable to afford to it any protection. I must go through more self-purification and sacrifice, before I can hope to save these lambs from this unholy sacrifice. Today I think I must die pining for this self-purification and sacrifice. It is my constant prayer that there may be born on earth some great spirit, man or woman, fired with divine pity, who will deliver us from this heinous sin, save the lives of the innocent creatures, and purify the temple. How is it that Bengal with all its knowledge, intelligence, sacrifice, and emotion tolerates this slaughter?
I believed then, and I believe even now, that, no matter what amount of work one has, one should always find some time for exercise, just as one does for ones meals.
So long as there are different religions, every one of them may need some outward distinctive symbol. But when the symbol is made into a fetish and an instrument of proving the superiority of ones religion over others, it is fit only to be discarded.
True beauty after all consists in purity of heart.
He who runs to the doctor, vaidya, or hakim for every little ailment, and swallows all kinds of vegetable and mineral drugs, not only curtails his life, but by becoming the slave of his body instead of remaining its master, loses self-control, and ceases to be a man.
I believe in effort, I do not want to bind myself with vows' is the mentality of weakness, and betrays a subtle desire for the thing to be avoided.
what is possible for one is possible for all,
A true Brahmachari will not even dream of satisfying the fleshly appetite
I have no doubt that the ideal is for public institutions to live, like nature, from day to day. The institution that fails to win public support has no right to exist as such.
But the fact that I had learnt to be tolerant to other religions did not mean that I had any living faith in God. I happened, about this time, to come across Manusmriti9 which was amongst my fathers collection. The story of the creation and similar things in it did not impress me very much, but on the contrary made me incline somewhat towards atheism.
A devotee of Truth may not do anything in deference to convention. He must always hold himself open to correction, and whenever he discovers himself to be wrong he must confess it at all costs and atone for it. Chapter
Without an unreserved surrender to His grace, complete mastery over thought is impossible.
All that appears and happens about and around us is uncertain transient. But there is a Supreme Being hidden therein as a Certainty, and one would be blessed if one could catch a glimpse of that Certainty and hitch one's waggon to it. The quest for that Truth is the summum bonum of life.
it is only when one sees ones own mistakes with a convex lens, and does just the reverse in the case of others, that one is able to arrive at a just relative estimate of the two. I further believe that a scrupulous and conscientious observance of this rule is necessary for one who wants to be a Satyagrahi.
Renunciation without aversion is not lasting.
the path of self-purification is hard and steep. To attain to perfect purity one has to become absolutely passion-free in thought, speech and action; to rise above the opposing currents of love and hatred, attachment and repulsion.
The instruments for the quest of truth are as simple as they are difficult. They may appear quite impossible to an arrogant person, and quite possible to an innocent child.
Passion in man is generally co-existent with a hankering after the pleasures of the palate. And
restraint in diet both as to quantity and quality is as essential as restraint in thought and speech.
began to take an exclusive fruit diet or to fast on the Ekadashi day, and also to observe Janmashtami and similar holidays.
remember that even truthfulness in the practice of the profession cannot cure it of the fundamental defect that vitiates it.
It is idle to adjudicate upon the right and wrong of incidents that have already happened. It is useful to understand them and, if possible, to learn a lesson from them for the future. It
in trying to enjoy the pleasures of sense, we lose in the end even our capacity for enjoyment. All this is passing before our very eyes, but there are none so blind as those who will not see.
Hate the sin and not the sinner
Supplication, worship, prayer are no superstition; they are acts more real than the acts of eating, drinking, sitting or walking. It is no exaggeration to say that they alone are real, all else is unreal. Such worship or prayer is no flight of eloquence; it is no lip-homage.
Man and his deed are two distinct things. Whereas a good deed should call forth approbation and a wicked deed disapprobation, the doer of the deed, whether good or wicked, always deserves respect or pity as the case may be. Hate the sin and not the sinner is a precept which, though easy enough to understand, is rarely practised, and that is why the poison of hatred spreads in the world.
For it is an unbroken torture to me that I am still so far from Him, who, as I fully know, governs every breath of my life, and whose offspring I am. I know that it is the evil passions within that keep me so far from Him, and yet I cannot get away from them.
The story of the creation and similar things in it did not impress me very much, but on the contrary made me incline somewhat towards atheism.
I am of opinion that all exclusive intimacies are to be avoided; for man takes in vice far more readily than virtue. And he who would be friends with God must remain alone, or make the whole world his friend.
A successful search for Truth means complete deliverance from the dual throng such as of love and hate, happiness and misery.
Spiritual relationship is far more precious than Physical relationship divorced from spiritual is body without soul.
How heavy is the toll of sins and wrongs that wealth, power and prestige exact from man!
Plymouth Brethren confronted me with an argument for which I was not prepared:   'You cannot understand the beauty of our religion. From what you say it appears that you must be brooding over your transgressions every moment of your life, always mending them and atoning for them. How can this ceaseless cycle of action bring you redemption? You can never have peace. You admit that we are all sinners. Now look at the perfection of our belief. Our attempts at improvement and atonement are futile. And yet redemption we must have. How can we bear the burden of sin? We can but throw it on Jesus. He is the only sinless Son of God. It is His word that those who believe in Him shall have everlasting life. Therein lies God's infinite mercy. And as we believe in the atonement of Jesus, our own sins do not bind us. Sin we must. It is impossible to live in this world sinless. And therefore Jesus suffered and atoned for all the sins of mankind. Only he who accepts His great redemption can have eternal peace. Think what a life of restlessness is yours, and what a promise of peace we have.'   The argument utterly failed to convince me. I humbly replied:
Truth is like a vast tree, which yields more and more fruit, the more you nurture it. The deeper the search in the mine of truth, the richer the discovery of the gems buried there, in the shape of openings or an ever greater variety of service.
hold that believers who have to see the same God in others that they see in themselves, must be able to live amongst all with sufficient detachment. And the ability to live thus can be cultivated, not by fighting shy of unsought opportunities for such contacts, but by hailing them in a spirit of service
But the path of self-purification is hard and steep. To attain to perfect purity one has to become absolutely passion-free in thought, speech and action; to rise above the opposing currents of love and hatred, attachment and repulsion.
And he who would be friends with God must remain alone, or make the whole world his friend
The people are like a flock of sheep, following where leaders lead them.
For it is an unbroken torture to me that I am still so far from Him, who, as I fully know, governs every breath of my life, and whose offspring I am. I know that it is the evil passions within that keep me so far from Him, and yet I cannot get away from them. But I must close. I can only take up the actual story in the next chapter.  M.K. Gandhi The Ashram, Sabarmati, Ahmedabad 26th November, 1925
It is the reformer who is anxious for the reform, and not society, from which he should expect nothing better than opposition, abhorrence, and even mortal prosecution.
Breach of promise is a base surrender of truth.
How it is that Bengal with all its knowledge, intelligence, sacrifice, and emotion tolerates this slaughter?
Human language can but imperfectly describe Gods ways.
This ahimsa is the basis of the search for truth. I am realizing every day that the search is vain unless it is founded on ahimsa as the basis. It is quite proper to resist and attack a system, but to resist and attack its author is tantamount to resisting and attacking oneself.
I am definitely of opinion that a public worker should accept no costly gifts.
Prayer needs no speech. It is itself independent of any sensuous effort.
I must confess that here I had to compromise the principle of giving no commission, which in Bombay I had so scrupulously observed. I was told that conditions in the two cases were different; that whilst in Bombay commissions had to be paid to touts, here they had to be paid to vakils who briefed you; and that here as in Bombay all barristers, without exception, paid a percentage of their fees as commission.
Experience has taught me that silence is part of the spiritual discipline of a votary of truth.
There are some actions from which an escape is a godsend both for the man who escapes and for those about him. Man, as soon as he gets back his consciousness of right, is thankful to the Divine mercy for the escape.
Only he Who is smitten with the arrows of love, Knows its power.
Great men never look at a persons exterior. They think of his heart.
To attain to perfect purity one has to become absolutely passion-free in thought, speech and action; to rise above the opposing currents of love and hatred, attachment and repulsion.
may not, now or hereafter, enter into a detailed account of the experiments in dietetics, for I did so in a series of Gujarati articles which appeared years ago in Indian Opinion, and which were afterwards published in the form of a book popularly known in English as A Guide to Health. Among my little books this has been the most widely read alike in the East and in the West, a thing that I have not yet been able to understand. It was written for the benefit of the readers of Indian Opinion. But I know that the booklet has profoundly influenced the lives of many, both in the East and in the West, who have never seen Indian Opinion.
It has always been a mystery to me how men can feel themselves honoured by the humiliation of their fellow beings.
I realized that it was not as easy to commit suicide as to contemplate it. And since then, whenever I have heard of someone threatening to commit suicide, it has had little or no effect on me.
Writing it is itself one of the experiments with truth.
Facts mean truth, and once we adhere to truth, the law comes to our aid naturally.
anyone doubts the infinite mercy of God, let him have a look at these sacred places. How much hypocrisy and irreligion does the Prince of Yogis suffer to be perpetrated in His holy name?
Many such experiments taught me that the real seat of taste was not the tongue but the mind.
Truth can hardly convey an idea of the indescribable lustre of Truth, a million times more intense than that of the sun we daily see with our eyes.
can never be realized by one who is not pure of heart.
I had never found people quick to pay the amounts they had undertaken to subscribe, and the Natal Indians were no exception to the rule. As, therefore, no work was done unless there were funds on hand, the Natal Indian Congress has never been in debt.
The law of Karma is inexorable and impossible of evasion. There is thus hardly any need for God to interfere. He laid down the law and, as it were, retired. After
But I could not for the life of me find out a new name, and therefore offered a nominal prize through Indian Opinion to the reader who made the best suggestion on the subject. As a result Maganlal Gandhi coined the word Sadagraha (Sat: truth, Agraha: firmness) and won the prize. But in order to make it clearer I changed the word to Satyagraha which has since become current in Gujarati as a designation for the struggle.
Whatever a man sows, that shall he reap.
I think it is wrong to expect certainties in this world, where all else but God, that is Truth, is an uncertainty.
All that appears and happens about and around us is uncertain, transient.
But you can wake a man only if he is really asleep; no effort that you may make will produce any effect upon him if he is merely pretending sleep. That
Sir Pherozeshah had seemed to me like the Himalaya, the Lokamanya like the ocean. But Gokhale was as the Ganges.
A clean confession, combined with a promise never to commit the sin again, when offered before one who has the right to receive it, is the purest type of repentance. I
Service of the poor has been my hearts desire, and it has always thrown me amongst the poor and enabled me to identify myself with them.
Where is there a wretch So wicked and loathsome as I? I have forsaken my Maker, So faithless have I been.
We labour under a sort of superstition that the child has nothing to learn during the first five years of its life. On the contrary the fact is that the child never learns in after-life what it does in its first five years.
There are some things which are known only to oneself and one's maker. These are clearly incommunicable.
Service which is rendered without joy helps neither the servant nor the served. But all other pleasures and possessions pale into nothingness before service which is rendered in a spirit of joy.
I simply want to tell the story of my numerous experiments with Truth, and as my life consists of nothing but those experiments; it is true that the story will take the shape of an autobiography.
