In consequence, I’m inclined to reserve all judgements, ahabit that has opened up many curious natures to me and also made methe victim of not a few veteran bores.

Reserving judgements is a matter ofinfinite hope.

I enjoyed thecounter-raid so thoroughly that I came back restless.

Everybody I knew was in the bond business, so I supposed itcould support one more single man.

All my aunts and uncles talked itover as if they were choosing a prep school for me, and finally said,“Why—ye-es,” with very grave, hesitant faces.

Hefound the house, a weather-beaten cardboard bungalow at eighty amonth, but at the last minute the firm ordered him to Washington, andI went out to the country alone.

And as I walked on I was lonely no longer.

I was a guide,a pathfinder, an original settler.

And I had the high intention of reading many otherbooks besides.

My house was at the very tip of theegg, only fifty yards from the Sound, and squeezed between two hugeplaces that rented for twelve or fifteen thousand a season.

It wasGatsby’s mansion.

Daisy was my second cousin once removed, and I’d known Tomin college.

They had spent a year in France forno particular reason, and then drifted here and there unrestfullywherever people played polo and were rich together.

Now he was a sturdystraw-haired man of thirty, with a rather hard mouth and asupercilious manner.

Two shining arrogant eyes had establisheddominance over his face and gave him the appearance of always leaningaggressively forward.

It was a body capable of enormous leverage—a cruel body.His speaking voice, a gruff husky tenor, added to the impression offractiousness he conveyed.

Thewindows were ajar and gleaming white against the fresh grass outsidethat seemed to grow a little way into the house.

They were both in white, and their dresses wererippling and fluttering as if they had just been blown back in after ashort flight around the house.

I must have stood for a few momentslistening to the whip and snap of the curtains and the groan of apicture on the wall.

She was extended fulllength at her end of the divan, completely motionless, and with herchin raised a little, as if she were balancing something on it whichwas quite likely to fall.

That was a way shehad.

She hinted in a murmur that the surname of the balancing girl wasBaker.

(I’ve heard it said that Daisy’s murmur was only to make peoplelean toward her; an irrelevant criticism that made it no lesscharming.

Again a sort of apology arose to my lips.Almost any exhibition of complete self-sufficiency draws a stunnedtribute from me.I looked back at my cousin, who began to ask me questions in her low,thrilling voice.

It was the kind of voice that the ear follows up anddown, as if each speech is an arrangement of notes that will never beplayed again.

All the cars have the left rear wheelpainted black as a mourning wreath, and there’s a persistent wail allnight along the north shore.”“How gorgeous!

Let’s go back, Tom.

She’s three years old.

Haven’t you ever seen her?”“Never.”“Well, you ought to see her.

“I’m absolutely in training.”Her host looked at her incredulously.“You are!” He took down his drink as if it were a drop in the bottomof a glass.

She was a slender, small-breasted girl, withan erect carriage, which she accentuated by throwing her body backwardat the shoulders like a young cadet.

Her grey sun-strained eyes lookedback at me with polite reciprocal curiosity out of a wan, charming,discontented face.

She snapped them out with herfingers.

“In two weeks it’ll be the longest day in the year.” Shelooked at us all radiantly.

“Do you always watch for the longest dayof the year and then miss it?

“I know you didn’t mean to,but you did do it.

They were here, and they accepted Tom and me, making only apolite pleasant effort to entertain or to be entertained.

They knewthat presently dinner would be over and a little later the evening toowould be over and casually put away.

“I’vegotten to be a terrible pessimist about things.

The idea isif we don’t look out the white race will be—will be utterlysubmerged.

“He reads deep books with long words inthem.

What was that word we—”“Well, these books are all scientific,” insisted Tom, glancing at herimpatiently.

“This fellow has worked out the whole thing.

“—And we’ve produced all thethings that go to make civilization—oh, science and art, and allthat.

He had to polish it from morning till night, until finally itbegan to affect his nose—”“Things went from bad to worse,” suggested Miss Baker.“Yes.

You remind me of a—of a rose, anabsolute rose.

I am not even faintly like a rose.

She was onlyextemporizing, but a stirring warmth flowed from her, as if her heartwas trying to come out to you concealed in one of those breathless,thrilling words.

I was about to speak when she sat up alertly and said “Sh!”in a warning voice.

Inits deep gloom we sat down side by side on a wicker settee.Daisy took her face in her hands as if feeling its lovely shape, andher eyes moved gradually out into the velvet dusk.

“Evenif we are cousins.

You didn’t come to my wedding.”“I wasn’t back from the war.”“That’s true.” She hesitated.

“Listen, Nick; let me tell youwhat I said when she was born.

Well, she wasless than an hour old and Tom was God knows where.

I woke up out ofthe ether with an utterly abandoned feeling, and asked the nurse rightaway if it was a boy or a girl.

She told me it was a girl, and so Iturned my head away and wept.

‘All right,’ I said, ‘I’m glad it’s agirl.

“Everybody thinks so—the most advanced people.

And Iknow.

I’ve been everywhere and seen everything and done everything.”Her eyes flashed around her in a defiant way, rather like Tom’s, andshe laughed with thrilling scorn.

“Sophisticated—God, I’msophisticated!”The instant her voice broke off, ceasing to compel my attention, mybelief, I felt the basic insincerity of what she had said.

It made meuneasy, as though the whole evening had been a trick of some sort toexact a contributory emotion from me.

I had heardsome story of her too, a critical, unpleasant story, but what it was Ihad forgotten long ago.“Good night,” she said softly.

“Wake me at eight, won’t you.”“If you’ll get up.”“I will.

Good night, Mr. Carraway.

See you anon.”“Of course you will,” confirmed Daisy.

“I haven’t heard aword.”“She’s a nice girl,” said Tom after a moment.

Besides, Nick’sgoing to look after her, aren’t you, Nick?

She’s going to spend lotsof weekends out here this summer.

Our white girlhood was passed together there.

Yes, I’m sure we did.

They came to the door with me and stoodside by side in a cheerful square of light.

We heard you wereengaged to a girl out West.”“That’s right,” corroborated Tom kindly.

“We heard that you wereengaged.”“It’s a libel.

I’m too poor.”“But we heard it,” insisted Daisy, surprising me by opening up againin a flower-like way.

The fact that gossip had published the banns was oneof the reasons I had come East.

It seemed to me that the thing for Daisy to do was to rush outof the house, child in arms—but apparently there were no suchintentions in her head.

The wind hadblown off, leaving a loud, bright night, with wings beating in thetrees and a persistent organ sound as the full bellows of the earthblew the frogs full of life.

Miss Baker had mentioned him at dinner, andthat would do for an introduction.

Involuntarily I glancedseaward—and distinguished nothing except a single green light, minuteand far away, that might have been the end of a dock.

They look out of no face,but, instead, from a pair of enormous yellow spectacles which passover a nonexistent nose.

Hisacquaintances resented the fact that he turned up in popular caféswith her and, leaving her at a table, sauntered about, chatting withwhomsoever he knew.

George B. Wilson.

It hadoccurred to me that this shadow of a garage must be a blind, and thatsumptuous and romantic apartments were concealed overhead, when theproprietor himself appeared in the door of an office, wiping his handson a piece of waste.

He was a blond, spiritless man, anaemic, andfaintly handsome.

“How’s business?”“I can’t complain,” answered Wilson unconvincingly.

She wasin the middle thirties, and faintly stout, but she carried her fleshsensuously as some women can.

She smiled slowly and, walkingthrough her husband as if he were a ghost, shook hands with Tom,looking him flush in the eye.

Then she wet her lips, and withoutturning around spoke to her husband in a soft, coarse voice:“Get some chairs, why don’t you, so somebody can sit down.”“Oh, sure,” agreed Wilson hurriedly, and went toward the littleoffice, mingling immediately with the cement colour of the walls.

Awhite ashen dust veiled his dark suit and his pale hair as it veiledeverything in the vicinity—except his wife, who moved close to Tom.“I want to see you,” said Tom intently.

He thinks she goes to see her sister in New York.

Upstairs, in the solemn echoing driveshe let four taxicabs drive away before she selected a new one,lavender-coloured with grey upholstery, and in this we slid out fromthe mass of the station into the glowing sunshine.

But immediately sheturned sharply from the window and, leaning forward, tapped on thefront glass.“I want to get one of those dogs,” she said earnestly.

“I want to getone for the apartment.

They’re nice to have—a dog.”We backed up to a grey old man who bore an absurd resemblance to JohnD.

Rockefeller.

“It’s more of an Airedale.” He passed his hand over thebrown washrag of a back.

“Look at that coat.

Some coat.

“How much isit?”“That dog?” He looked at it admiringly.

That dog’s a boy.”“It’s a bitch,” said Tom decisively.

“Here’s your money.

“Myrtle’ll be hurt if youdon’t come up to the apartment.

Won’t you, Myrtle?”“Come on,” she urged.

“I’ll telephone my sister Catherine.

“And, of course, I got to call up my sister, too.”The apartment was on the top floor—a small living-room, a smalldining-room, a small bedroom, and a bath.

The only picture was anover-enlarged photograph, apparently a hen sitting on a blurred rock.Looked at from a distance, however, the hen resolved itself into abonnet, and the countenance of a stout old lady beamed down into theroom.

Mrs. Wilson was first concerned with the dog.

Her eyebrows had been plucked and then drawn on again at a morerakish angle, but the efforts of nature toward the restoration of theold alignment gave a blurred air to her face.

When she moved aboutthere was an incessant clicking as innumerable pottery braceletsjingled up and down upon her arms.

She came in with such a proprietaryhaste, and looked around so possessively at the furniture that Iwondered if she lived here.

But when I asked her she laughedimmoderately, repeated my question aloud, and told me she lived with agirl friend at a hotel.Mr.

McKee was a pale, feminine man from the flat below.

He had justshaved, for there was a white spot of lather on his cheekbone, and hewas most respectful in his greeting to everyone in the room.

Heinformed me that he was in the “artistic game,” and I gathered laterthat he was a photographer and had made the dim enlargement ofMrs.

Wilson’s mother which hovered like an ectoplasm on the wall.

Hiswife was shrill, languid, handsome, and horrible.

She told me withpride that her husband had photographed her a hundred and twenty-seventimes since they had been married.Mrs.

Wilson had changed her costume some time before, and was nowattired in an elaborate afternoon dress of cream-coloured chiffon,which gave out a continual rustle as she swept about the room.

Withthe influence of the dress her personality had also undergone achange.

The intense vitality that had been so remarkable in the garagewas converted into impressive hauteur.

All they think of is money.

Ihad a woman up here last week to look at my feet, and when she gave methe bill you’d of thought she had my appendicitis out.”“What was the name of the woman?” asked Mrs. McKee.“Mrs.

Eberhardt.

Wilson rejected the compliment by raising her eyebrow in disdain.“It’s just a crazy old thing,” she said.

Mr.McKee regarded her intently with his head on one side, and then movedhis hand back and forth slowly in front of his face.“I should change the light,” he said after a moment.

“I’d like tobring out the modelling of the features.

“These people!

You have tokeep after them all the time.”She looked at me and laughed pointlessly.

I was down there at a party about a month ago.

At a man namedGatsby’s.

That’swhere all his money comes from.”“Really?”She nodded.“I’m scared of him.

Wilson entered with a tray.

“What I sayis, why go on living with them if they can’t stand them?

She lowered her voice again.“It’s really his wife that’s keeping them apart.

“I just got backfrom Monte Carlo.”“Really.”“Just last year.

I went over there with another girl.”“Stay long?”“No, we just went to Monte Carlo and back.

We went by way ofMarseilles.

We had over twelve hundred dollars when we started, but wegot gyped out of it all in two days in the private rooms.

We had anawful time getting back, I can tell you.

“I almostmarried a little kike who’d been after me for years.

I knew he wasbelow me.

“Who said I was crazyabout him?

I knew right away I madea mistake.

Yethigh over the city our line of yellow windows must have contributedtheir share of human secrecy to the casual watcher in the darkeningstreets, and I saw him too, looking up and wondering.

I’ve got to get another one tomorrow.

I’m going tomake a list of all the things I’ve got to get.

Mr. McKee was asleep on a chair with his fistsclenched in his lap, like a photograph of a man of action.

Peopledisappeared, reappeared, made plans to go somewhere, and then losteach other, searched for each other, found each other a few feetaway.

Daisy!

Daisy!” shouted Mrs. Wilson.

“I’ll say it whenever Iwant to!

Daisy!

Mr. McKee awoke from his doze and started in a daze toward thedoor.

IIIThere was music from my neighbour’s house through the summer nights.In his blue gardens men and girls came and went like moths among thewhisperings and the champagne and the stars.

Laughter is easier minute by minute,spilled with prodigality, tipped out at a cheerful word.

People were notinvited—they went there.

Sometimes they came and went without havingmet Gatsby at all, came for the party with a simplicity of heart thatwas its own ticket of admission.I had been actually invited.

A chauffeur in a uniform of robin’s-eggblue crossed my lawn early that Saturday morning with a surprisinglyformal note from his employer: the honour would be entirely Gatsby’s,it said, if I would attend his “little party” that night.

I was immediately struck by the number ofyoung Englishmen dotted about; all well dressed, all looking a littlehungry, and all talking in low, earnest voices to solid and prosperousAmericans.

I was sure that they were selling something: bonds orinsurance or automobiles.

“Sorry you didn’t win.”That was for the golf tournament.

With Jordan’s slender golden arm resting in mine, wedescended the steps and sauntered about the garden.

I was going to wear it tonight, but it was too big in thebust and had to be altered.

It was gas blue with lavender beads.

Twohundred and sixty-five dollars.”“There’s something funny about a fellow that’ll do a thing like that,”said the other girl eagerly.

Somebody told me—”The two girls and Jordan leaned together confidentially.“Somebody told me they thought he killed a man once.”A thrill passed over all of us.

“You look at him sometimeswhen he thinks nobody’s looking at him.

I’ll bet he killed a man.”She narrowed her eyes and shivered.

Lucille shivered.

We all turnedand looked around for Gatsby.

Theundergraduate nodded in a cynical, melancholy way.The bar, where we glanced first, was crowded, but Gatsby was notthere.

She couldn’t find him from the top of the steps, and he wasn’ton the veranda.

As a matter of fact you needn’t bother to ascertain.

Iascertained.

I thought they’d be a nicedurable cardboard.

Matter of fact, they’re absolutely real.

Pagesand—Here!

“It’s a bona-fide piece of printedmatter.

It fooled me.

This fella’s a regular Belasco.

It’s atriumph.

What thoroughness!

What realism!

Knew when to stop,too—didn’t cut the pages.

But what do you want?

What do you expect?”He snatched the book from me and replaced it hastily on its shelf,muttering that if one brick was removed the whole library was liableto collapse.“Who brought you?” he demanded.

“Or did you just come?

“Mrs.

ClaudRoosevelt.

Do you know her?

I met her somewhere last night.

I can’t tell yet.

I’ve only been here an hour.Did I tell you about the books?

They’re real.

By midnight the hilarity had increased.

Apair of stage twins, who turned out to be the girls in yellow, did ababy act in costume, and champagne was served in glasses bigger thanfinger-bowls.

We were sitting at a table with a manof about my age and a rowdy little girl, who gave way upon theslightest provocation to uncontrollable laughter.

I was enjoyingmyself now.

I had taken two finger-bowls of champagne, and the scenehad changed before my eyes into something significant, elemental, andprofound.At a lull in the entertainment the man looked at me and smiled.“Your face is familiar,” he said politely.

“Weren’t you in the FirstDivision during the war?”“Why yes.

“This is anunusual party for me.

I haven’t even seen the host.

“Oh, I beg your pardon.”“I thought you knew, old sport.

It was oneof those rare smiles with a quality of eternal reassurance in it, thatyou may come across four or five times in life.

It faced—or seemed toface—the whole eternal world for an instant, and then concentrated onyou with an irresistible prejudice in your favour.

He excused himself with a small bow that included each ofus in turn.“If you want anything just ask for it, old sport,” he urged me.“Excuse me.

“Do you know?”“He’s just a man named Gatsby.”“Where is he from, I mean?

Thatwas comprehensible.

“And I like large parties.They’re so intimate.

At small parties there isn’t any privacy.”There was the boom of a bass drum, and the voice of the orchestraleader rang out suddenly above the echolalia of the garden.“Ladies and gentlemen,” he cried.

His tanned skinwas drawn attractively tight on his face and his short hair looked asthough it were trimmed every day.

I could see nothing sinister abouthim.

I wondered if the fact that he was not drinking helped to set himoff from his guests, for it seemed to me that he grew more correct asthe fraternal hilarity increased.

For some time confused andintriguing sounds had issued from a long, many-windowed room whichoverhung the terrace.

One of the girls in yellow wasplaying the piano, and beside her stood a tall, red-haired young ladyfrom a famous chorus, engaged in song.

Whenever there was a pause in the song she filled it withgasping, broken sobs, and then took up the lyric again in a quaveringsoprano.

A humorous suggestion was made that she sing the noteson her face, whereupon she threw up her hands, sank into a chair, andwent off into a deep vinous sleep.“She had a fight with a man who says he’s her husband,” explained agirl at my elbow.I looked around.

Most of the remaining women were now having fightswith men said to be their husbands.

The hallwas at present occupied by two deplorably sober men and their highlyindignant wives.

Iwanted to explain that I’d hunted for him early in the evening and toapologize for not having known him in the garden.“Don’t mention it,” he enjoined me eagerly.

“Don’t give it anotherthought, old sport.” The familiar expression held no more familiaritythan the hand which reassuringly brushed my shoulder.

Fifty feet from the door a dozen headlights illuminated abizarre and tumultuous scene.

The sharp jut of a wallaccounted for the detachment of the wheel, which was now gettingconsiderable attention from half a dozen curious chauffeurs.

“I know very little about driving—next to nothing.

A bad driver and not even trying!”“You don’t understand,” explained the criminal.

“I wasn’t driving.There’s another man in the car.”The shock that followed this declaration found voice in a sustained“Ah-h-h!” as the door of the coupé swung slowly open.

I glanced back once.

I knew the other clerks and young bond-salesmenby their first names, and lunched with them in dark, crowdedrestaurants on little pig sausages and mashed potatoes and coffee.

Therewere generally a few rioters around, but they never came into thelibrary, so it was a good place to work.

Sometimes, in my mind, I followed them to theirapartments on the corners of hidden streets, and they turned andsmiled back at me before they faded through a door into warmdarkness.

Forms leaned together in the taxis as theywaited, and voices sang, and there was laughter from unheard jokes,and lighted cigarettes made unintelligible circles inside.

At first I was flattered to go places with her,because she was a golf champion, and everyone knew her name.

Then itwas something more.

I wasn’t actually in love, but I felt a sort oftender curiosity.

The thing approachedthe proportions of a scandal—then died away.

A caddy retracted hisstatement, and the only other witness admitted that he might have beenmistaken.

Dishonesty in a woman is a thing younever blame deeply—I was casually sorry, and then I forgot.

It was onthat same house-party that we had a curious conversation about drivinga car.

It started because she passed so close to some workmen that ourfender flicked a button on one man’s coat.“You’re a rotten driver,” I protested.

“I hate careless people.

He came only once,in white knickerbockers, and had a fight with a bum named Etty in thegarden.

From farther out on the Island came the Cheadles and the O.R.

Snell was there three days before hewent to the penitentiary, so drunk out on the gravel drive thatMrs.

Ulysses Swett’s automobile ran over his right hand.

Schwartz (the son) and Arthur McCarty, all connected with themovies in one way or another.

They were never quitethe same ones in physical person, but they were so identical one withanother that it inevitably seemed they had been there before.

This qualitywas continually breaking through his punctilious manner in the shapeof restlessness.

“Haven’t you ever seen it before?”I’d seen it.

Everybody had seen it.

Sitting downbehind many layers of glass in a sort of green leather conservatory,we started to town.I had talked with him perhaps half a dozen times in the past month andfound, to my disappointment, that he had little to say.

“I am the son of some wealthy people in theMiddle West—all dead now.

He hurried the phrase “educated at Oxford,” or swallowedit, or choked on it, as though it had bothered him before.

It was a great relief, and I tried veryhard to die, but I seemed to bear an enchanted life.

I accepted acommission as first lieutenant when it began.

We stayed there two days and two nights, a hundred and thirtymen with sixteen Lewis guns, and when the infantry came up at lastthey found the insignia of three German divisions among the piles ofdead.

He lifted up the words and nodded at them—with hissmile.

Itappreciated fully the chain of national circumstances which hadelicited this tribute from Montenegro’s warm little heart.

A souvenir of Oxford days.

There was Gatsby,looking a little, not much, younger—with a cricket bat in his hand.Then it was all true.

I didn’t want you to think I was just some nobody.

His correctness grew on him as we nearedthe city.

We slowed down.

Taking a whitecard from his wallet, he waved it before the man’s eyes.“Right you are,” agreed the policeman, tipping his cap.

Excuse me!”“What was that?” I inquired.

The friends looked out at us with the tragic eyes and shortupper lips of southeastern Europe, and I was glad that the sight ofGatsby’s splendid car was included in their sombre holiday.

Blinking away the brightness of the street outside, my eyespicked him out obscurely in the anteroom, talking to another man.“Mr.

“Filled withfaces dead and gone.

Filled with friends gone now forever.

Itwas six of us at the table, and Rosy had eat and drunk a lot allevening.

When it was almost morning the waiter came up to him with afunny look and says somebody wants to speak to him outside.

His eyes, meanwhile, roved very slowly all aroundthe room—he completed the arc by turning to inspect the peopledirectly behind.

Why has it all gotto come through Miss Baker?”“Oh, it’s nothing underhand,” he assured me.

“Fine fellow, isn’t he?

“I made the pleasureof his acquaintance just after the war.

“I see you’re looking at mycuff buttons.”I hadn’t been looking at them, but I did now.

“That’s a very interesting idea.”“Yeah.” He flipped his sleeves up under his coat.

“Yeah, Gatsby’s verycareful about women.

“You sit here and discuss your sports and your young ladiesand your—” He supplied an imaginary noun with another wave of hishand.

“As for me, I am fifty years old, and I won’t impose myself onyou any longer.”As he shook hands and turned away his tragic nose was trembling.

Iwondered if I had said anything to offend him.“He becomes very sentimental sometimes,” explained Gatsby.

“This isone of his sentimental days.

He’s a smart man.”I insisted on paying the check.

She was just eighteen, two years older than me, andby far the most popular of all the young girls in Louisville.

Shedressed in white, and had a little white roadster, and all day longthe telephone rang in her house and excited young officers from CampTaylor demanded the privilege of monopolizing her thatnight.

“Please come here.”I was flattered that she wanted to speak to me, because of all theolder girls I admired her most.

She asked me if I was going to the RedCross to make bandages.

I was.

Well, then, would I tell them that shecouldn’t come that day?

The officer looked at Daisy while she wasspeaking, in a way that every young girl wants to be looked atsometime, and because it seemed romantic to me I have remembered theincident ever since.

She went with a slightly older crowd—when she went with anyoneat all.

She was effectuallyprevented, but she wasn’t on speaking terms with her family forseveral weeks.

After that she didn’t play around with the soldiers anymore, but only with a few flat-footed, shortsighted young men in town,who couldn’t get into the army at all.By the next autumn she was gay again, gay as ever.

I came into her room half an hour before thebridal dinner, and found her lying on her bed as lovely as the Junenight in her flowered dress—and as drunk as a monkey.

She had a bottleof Sauterne in one hand and a letter in the other.“ ’Gratulate me,” she muttered.

“Take ’em downstairsand give ’em back to whoever they belong to.

Tell ’em all Daisy’schange’ her mine.

Say: ‘Daisy’s change’ her mine!’ ”She began to cry—she cried and cried.

I rushed out and found hermother’s maid, and we locked the door and got her into a cold bath.She wouldn’t let go of the letter.

She took it into the tub with herand squeezed it up in a wet ball, and only let me leave it in thesoap-dish when she saw that it was coming to pieces like snow.But she didn’t say another word.

We gave her spirits of ammonia andput ice on her forehead and hooked her back into her dress, and halfan hour later, when we walked out of the room, the pearls were aroundher neck and the incident was over.

She used to sit on the sand with his head in her lap by thehour, rubbing her fingers over his eyes and looking at him withunfathomable delight.

It was touching to see them together—it made youlaugh in a hushed, fascinated way.

That was in August.

I saw them one spring in Cannes, and later in Deauville, andthen they came back to Chicago to settle down.

Daisy was popular inChicago, as you know.

They moved with a fast crowd, all of them youngand rich and wild, but she came out with an absolutely perfectreputation.

Perhaps because she doesn’t drink.

It’s a great advantagenot to drink among hard-drinking people.

You can hold your tongue and,moreover, you can time any little irregularity of your own so thateverybody else is so blind that they don’t see or care.

Your love belongs to me.

He thought you might beoffended.

You see, he’s regular tough underneath it all.”Something worried me.“Why didn’t he ask you to arrange a meeting?”“He wants her to see his house,” she explained.

Then he began askingpeople casually if they knew her, and I was the first one he found.

Itwas that night he sent for me at his dance, and you should have heardthe elaborate way he worked up to it.

Gatsby doesn’t want her to know.

Her wan, scornful mouthsmiled, and so I drew her up again closer, this time to my face.

Two o’clock and the whole corner of thepeninsula was blazing with light, which fell unreal on the shrubberyand made thin elongating glints upon the roadside wires.

But there wasn’t a sound.

Only wind inthe trees, which blew the wires and made the lights go off and onagain as if the house had winked into the darkness.

“I have beenglancing into some of the rooms.

Let’s go to Coney Island, oldsport.

In my car.”“It’s too late.”“Well, suppose we take a plunge in the swimming pool?

“I’m going to callup Daisy tomorrow and invite her over here to tea.”“Oh, that’s all right,” he said carelessly.

“I don’t want to put youto any trouble.”“What day would suit you?”“What day would suit you?” he corrected me quickly.

At least—” He fumbled with a series ofbeginnings.

It wouldn’t take up much of your timeand you might pick up a nice bit of money.

At eleven o’clock a man in araincoat, dragging a lawn-mower, tapped at my front door and said thatMr.

An hourlater the front door opened nervously, and Gatsby in a white flannelsuit, silver shirt, and gold-coloured tie, hurried in.

“Oh, the grass in the yard.” Helooked out the window at it, but, judging from his expression, I don’tbelieve he saw a thing.“Looks very good,” he remarked vaguely.

“One of the papers said theythought the rain would stop about four.

I think it was TheJournal.

Have you got everything you need in the shape of—of tea?”I took him into the pantry, where he looked a little reproachfully atthe Finn.

They’re fine!” and he added hollowly, “… oldsport.”The rain cooled about half-past three to a damp mist, through whichoccasional thin drops swam like dew.

Finally he got up and informed me, in anuncertain voice, that he was going home.“Why’s that?”“Nobody’s coming to tea.

It’s too late!” He looked at his watch as ifthere was some pressing demand on his time elsewhere.

It stopped.

Daisy’s face, tipped sideways beneath athree-cornered lavender hat, looked out at me with a bright ecstaticsmile.“Is this absolutely where you live, my dearest one?”The exhilarating ripple of her voice was a wild tonic in the rain.

Ihad to follow the sound of it for a moment, up and down, with my earalone, before any words came through.

“Why?”We went in.

I went out and opened it.

It wasn’t a bit funny.

Aware of the loud beating of myown heart I pulled the door to against the increasing rain.For half a minute there wasn’t a sound.

His eyes glanced momentarily atme, and his lips parted with an abortive attempt at a laugh.

Luckilythe clock took this moment to tilt dangerously at the pressure of hishead, whereupon he turned and caught it with trembling fingers, andset it back in place.

Then he sat down, rigidly, his elbow on the armof the sofa and his chin in his hand.“I’m sorry about the clock,” he said.My own face had now assumed a deep tropical burn.

I had them both on their feet with the desperatesuggestion that they help me make tea in the kitchen when the demoniacFinn brought it in on a tray.Amid the welcome confusion of cups and cakes a certain physicaldecency established itself.

Gatsby got himself into a shadow and,while Daisy and I talked, looked conscientiously from one to the otherof us with tense, unhappy eyes.

“Not onlythat, but you’re rude.

There was nothing to look at from under the tree exceptGatsby’s enormous house, so I stared at it, like Kant at his churchsteeple, for half an hour.

A brewer had built it early in the “period”craze, a decade before, and there was a story that he’d agreed to payfive years’ taxes on all the neighbouring cottages if the owners wouldhave their roofs thatched with straw.

His children sold his house with the black wreath still onthe door.

A maid began openingthe upper windows of his house, appeared momentarily in each, and,leaning from the large central bay, spat meditatively into thegarden.

It was time I went back.

While the rain continued it hadseemed like the murmur of their voices, rising and swelling a littlenow and then with gusts of emotion.

Theywere sitting at either end of the couch, looking at each other as ifsome question had been asked, or was in the air, and every vestige ofembarrassment was gone.

Daisy’s face was smeared with tears, and whenI came in she jumped up and began wiping at it with her handkerchiefbefore a mirror.

But there was a change in Gatsby that was simplyconfounding.

He literally glowed; without a word or a gesture ofexultation a new well-being radiated from him and filled the littleroom.“Oh, hello, old sport,” he said, as if he hadn’t seen me for years.

“What do you think of that?

“See how the wholefront of it catches the light.”I agreed that it was splendid.“Yes.” His eyes went over it, every arched door and square tower.

“I was in thedrug business and then I was in the oil business.

But I’m not ineither one now.” He looked at me with more attention.

Peoplewho do interesting things.

Celebrated people.”Instead of taking the shortcut along the Sound we went down to theroad and entered by the big postern.

Sometimes too, he stared around at hispossessions in a dazed way, as though in her actual and astoundingpresence none of it was any longer real.

Daisy took the brushwith delight, and smoothed her hair, whereupon Gatsby sat down andshaded his eyes and began to laugh.“It’s the funniest thing, old sport,” he said hilariously.

“Ican’t—When I try to—”He had passed visibly through two states and was entering upon athird.

After his embarrassment and his unreasoning joy he was consumedwith wonder at her presence.

He had been full of the idea so long,dreamed it right through to the end, waited with his teeth set, so tospeak, at an inconceivable pitch of intensity.

Suddenly, with a strained sound, Daisy bent her head intothe shirts and began to cry stormily.“They’re such beautiful shirts,” she sobbed, her voice muffled in thethick folds.

“You always have a green light that burns all night atthe end of your dock.”Daisy put her arm through his abruptly, but he seemed absorbed in whathe had just said.

Possibly it had occurred to him that the colossalsignificance of that light had now vanished forever.

Compared to thegreat distance that had separated him from Daisy it had seemed verynear to her, almost touching her.

It had seemed as close as a star tothe moon.

Now it was again a green light on a dock.

His count ofenchanted objects had diminished by one.I began to walk about the room, examining various indefinite objectsin the half darkness.

A large photograph of an elderly man in yachtingcostume attracted me, hung on the wall over his desk.“Who’s this?”“That?

“The pompadour!

“Here’s a lot of clippings—aboutyou.”They stood side by side examining it.

Then I got up …”“Klipspringer plays the piano,” said Gatsby, cutting him off.

“Don’tyou, Ewing, old sport?”“I don’t play well.

I don’t—hardly play at all.

I’m all out of prac—”“We’ll go downstairs,” interrupted Gatsby.

He flipped a switch.

I told you I couldn’t play.

I’m allout of prac—”“Don’t talk so much, old sport,” commanded Gatsby.

It was the hour of a profound human change, and excitement wasgenerating on the air.

“One thing’s sure and nothing’s surer The rich get richer and the poor get—children.

Almostfive years!

There must have been moments even that afternoon whenDaisy tumbled short of his dreams—not through her own fault, butbecause of the colossal vitality of his illusion.

It had gone beyondher, beyond everything.

He had thrown himself into it with a creativepassion, adding to it all the time, decking it out with every brightfeather that drifted his way.

His hand tookhold of hers, and as she said something low in his ear he turnedtoward her with a rush of emotion.

I looked once more at them and theylooked back at me, remotely, possessed by intense life.

Then I wentout of the room and down the marble steps into the rain, leaving themthere together.

Hisparents were shiftless and unsuccessful farm people—his imaginationhad never really accepted them as his parents at all.

The most grotesqueand fantastic conceits haunted him in his bed at night.

Each night he added to the pattern of hisfancies until drowsiness closed down upon some vivid scene with anoblivious embrace.

Hestayed there two weeks, dismayed at its ferocious indifference to thedrums of his destiny, to destiny itself, and despising the janitor’swork with which he was to pay his way through.

Isuppose he smiled at Cody—he had probably discovered that people likedhim when he smiled.

At any rate Cody asked him a few questions (one ofthem elicited the brand new name) and found that he was quick andextravagantly ambitious.

A few days later he took him to Duluth andbought him a blue coat, six pairs of white duck trousers, and ayachting cap.

It was indirectly due toCody that Gatsby drank so little.

He didn’t get it.

Moreover he told it to me at a timeof confusion, when I had reached the point of believing everything andnothing about him.

I hadn’t been there two minutes when somebody brought TomBuchanan in for a drink.

“I’mdelighted that you dropped in.”As though they cared!“Sit right down.

Have a cigarette or a cigar.” He walked around theroom quickly, ringing bells.

“I’ll have something to drink for you injust a minute.”He was profoundly affected by the fact that Tom was there.

But hewould be uneasy anyhow until he had given them something, realizing ina vague way that that was all they came for.

Mr. Sloane wantednothing.

A lemonade?

No, thanks.

A little champagne?

I remember very well.”“About two weeks ago.”“That’s right.

“Well—think oughtto be starting home.”“Please don’t hurry,” Gatsby urged them.

He had control of himselfnow, and he wanted to see more of Tom.

“Why don’t you—why don’t youstay for supper?

I wouldn’t be surprised if some other people droppedin from New York.”“You come to supper with me,” said the lady enthusiastically.

“Both ofyou.”This included me.

“I’d love to have you.

Lots of room.”Gatsby looked at me questioningly.

Sloane murmured something close to her ear.“We won’t be late if we start now,” she insisted aloud.“I haven’t got a horse,” said Gatsby.

“I used to ride in the army, butI’ve never bought a horse.

I’ll have to follow you in my car.

“I wonder where in the devil he met Daisy.

Perhaps his presence gave the evening its peculiar quality ofoppressiveness—it stands out in my memory from Gatsby’s other partiesthat summer.

“If you want to kiss meany time during the evening, Nick, just let me know and I’ll be gladto arrange it for you.

Just mention my name.

Or present a green card.I’m giving out green—”“Look around,” suggested Gatsby.“I’m looking around.

I remember being surprised by his graceful,conservative foxtrot—I had never seen him dance before.

Then theysauntered over to my house and sat on the steps for half an hour,while at her request I remained watchfully in the garden.

“In casethere’s a fire or a flood,” she explained, “or any act of God.”Tom appeared from his oblivion as we were sitting down to suppertogether.

“Do you mind if I eat with some people over here?” hesaid.

When she’s had five or six cocktails shealways starts screaming like that.

“Your handshakes.

I wouldn’t let you operate on me!”It was like that.

Almost the last thing I remember was standing withDaisy and watching the moving-picture director and his Star.

They werestill under the white-plum tree and their faces were touching exceptfor a pale, thin ray of moonlight between.

She saw something awful inthe very simplicity she failed to understand.I sat on the front steps with them while they waited for their car.It was dark here in front; only the bright door sent ten square feetof light volleying out into the soft black morning.

“Some bigbootlegger?”“Where’d you hear that?” I inquired.“I didn’t hear it.

I imagined it.

They simply force their wayin and he’s too polite to object.”“I’d like to know who he is and what he does,” insisted Tom.

“And Ithink I’ll make a point of finding out.”“I can tell you right now,” she answered.

“He owned some drugstores, alot of drugstores.

After all, in the very casualness ofGatsby’s party there were romantic possibilities totally absent fromher world.

What was it up there in the song that seemed to be callingher back inside?

When he came down thesteps at last the tanned skin was drawn unusually tight on his face,and his eyes were bright and tired.“She didn’t like it,” he said immediately.“Of course she did.”“She didn’t like it,” he insisted.

“She didn’t have a good time.”He was silent, and I guessed at his unutterable depression.“I feel far away from her,” he said.

“She used to be able tounderstand.

“You can’t repeat thepast.”“Can’t repeat the past?” he cried incredulously.

Theystopped here and turned toward each other.

Now it was a cool nightwith that mysterious excitement in it which comes at the two changesof the year.

The quiet lights in the houses were humming out into thedarkness and there was a stir and bustle among the stars.

Heknew that when he kissed this girl, and forever wed his unutterablevisions to her perishable breath, his mind would never romp again likethe mind of God.

So he waited, listening for a moment longer to thetuning-fork that had been struck upon a star.

Then he kissed her.

For a moment a phrasetried to take shape in my mouth and my lips parted like a dumb man’s,as though there was more struggling upon them than a wisp of startledair.

But they made no sound, and what I had almost remembered wasuncommunicable forever.

Only gradually did Ibecome aware that the automobiles which turned expectantly into hisdrive stayed for just a minute and then drove sulkily away.

Tell him Mr.Carraway came over.”“Who?” he demanded rudely.“Carraway.”“Carraway.

They’re allbrothers and sisters.

Miss Baker would be there.

Half an hour later Daisyherself telephoned and seemed relieved to find that I wascoming.

Something was up.

“Some weather!

… Hot!

…Hot!

… Hot!

… Is it hot enough for you?

Is it hot?

In this heat every extra gesture was an affront to thecommon store of life.The room, shadowed well with awnings, was dark and cool.

“It’s a bona-fide deal.

Gatsby!” He put out his broad, flat hand with well-concealeddislike.

Did mother get powder on your old yellowyhair?

Stand up now, and say—How-de-do.”Gatsby and I in turn leaned down and took the small reluctant hand.Afterward he kept looking at the child with surprise.

“You dream, you.

Youabsolute little dream.”“Yes,” admitted the child calmly.

“She looks likeme.

She’s got my hair and shape of the face.”Daisy sat back upon the couch.

Slowly the white wings of the boatmoved against the blue cool limit of the sky.

Ahead lay the scallopedocean and the abounding blessed isles.“There’s sport for you,” said Tom, nodding.

Gatsby’s eyesfloated toward her.

“Ah,” she cried, “you look so cool.”Their eyes met, and they stared together at each other, alone inspace.

He wasastounded.

Come on—we’re all going to town.”He got up, his eyes still flashing between Gatsby and his wife.

No onemoved.“Come on!” His temper cracked a little.

“What’s the matter, anyhow?If we’re going to town, let’s start.”His hand, trembling with his effort at self-control, bore to his lipsthe last of his glass of ale.

Daisy’s voice got us to our feet and outon to the blazing gravel drive.“Are we just going to go?” she objected.

“Like this?

Aren’t we goingto let anyone smoke a cigarette first?”“Everybody smoked all through lunch.”“Oh, let’s have fun,” she begged him.

“It’s too hot to fuss.”He didn’t answer.“Have it your own way,” she said.

“Come on, Jordan.”They went upstairs to get ready while we three men stood thereshuffling the hot pebbles with our feet.

A silver curve of the moonhovered already in the western sky.

He went inside.Gatsby turned to me rigidly:“I can’t say anything in his house, old sport.”“She’s got an indiscreet voice,” I remarked.

“It’s full of—” Ihesitated.“Her voice is full of money,” he said suddenly.That was it.

I’d never understood before.

He felt the hot, greenleather of the seat.

He looked at the gauge.

“Andif it runs out I can stop at a drugstore.

You can buy anything at adrugstore nowadays.”A pause followed this apparently pointless remark.

We’ll follow you in the coupé.”She walked close to Gatsby, touching his coat with her hand.

Maybe you don’t believe that, but science—”He paused.

The immediate contingency overtook him, pulled him backfrom the edge of theoretical abyss.“I’ve made a small investigation of this fellow,” he continued.

No, I haven’t.

“Like hell he is!

After a moment the proprietor emerged fromthe interior of his establishment and gazed hollow-eyed at the car.“Let’s have some gas!” cried Tom roughly.

“What do you think westopped for—to admire the view?”“I’m sick,” said Wilson without moving.

In the sunlight hisface was green.“I didn’t mean to interrupt your lunch,” he said.

I want to get away.

“And now she’s going whether shewants to or not.

“That’s why I want to get away.

He had discovered that Myrtle had some sort of lifeapart from him in another world, and the shock had made him physicallysick.

Soengrossed was she that she had no consciousness of being observed, andone emotion after another crept into her face like objects into aslowly developing picture.

His wife and hismistress, until an hour ago secure and inviolate, were slippingprecipitately from his control.

“You go.

We’ll ride around and meet youafter.” With an effort her wit rose faintly.

“We’ll meet you on somecorner.

I’ll be the man smoking two cigarettes.”“We can’t argue about it here,” Tom said impatiently, as a truck gaveout a cursing whistle behind us.

“You follow me to the south side ofCentral Park, in front of the Plaza.”Several times he turned his head and looked back for their car, and ifthe traffic delayed them he slowed up until they came into sight.

Ithink he was afraid they would dart down a side-street and out of hislife forever.But they didn’t.

“You’re the onethat wanted to come to town.”There was a moment of silence.

Somebody fainted.

Who was it fainted, Tom?”“Biloxi,” he answered shortly.“A man named Biloxi.

And he stayed three weeks, until Daddytold him he had to get out.

The day after he left Daddy died.”  Aftera moment she added.

I knew his whole family history before heleft.

“If we were young we’d rise anddance.”“Remember Biloxi,” Jordan warned her.

“Where’d you know him, Tom?”“Biloxi?” He concentrated with an effort.

“I didn’t know him.

He was afriend of Daisy’s.”“He was not,” she denied.

“I’d never seen him before.

He came down inthe private car.”“Well, he said he knew you.

He said he was raised in Louisville.

AsaBird brought him around at the last minute and asked if we had roomfor him.”Jordan smiled.“He was probably bumming his way home.

A waiter knocked and came in with crushed mint and icebut the silence was unbroken by his “thank you” and the soft closingof the door.

But we were alllooking at Gatsby.“It was an opportunity they gave to some of the officers after thearmistice,” he continued.

“We could go to any of the universities inEngland or France.”I wanted to get up and slap him on the back.

“You’re causing a row.

Please have a little self-control.”“Self-control!” repeated Tom incredulously.

I don’t give big parties.

The transition from libertine to prig was socomplete.“I’ve got something to tell you, old sport—” began Gatsby.

But Daisyguessed at his intention.“Please don’t!” she interrupted helplessly.

“Please let’s all gohome.

Why don’t we all go home?”“That’s a good idea,” I got up.

“Come on, Tom.

“She only married youbecause I was poor and she was tired of waiting for me.

“What’s been going on?

I want to hear all about it.”“I told you what’s been going on,” said Gatsby.

“No, we couldn’t meet.

But both of us lovedeach other all that time, old sport, and you didn’t know.

But all the rest of that’s a God damned lie.

Daisyloved me when she married me and she loves me now.”“No,” said Gatsby, shaking his head.“She does, though.

“And what’s more, I love Daisy too.

She turned to me, and her voice,dropping an octave lower, filled the room with thrilling scorn: “Doyou know why we left Chicago?

I’m surprised that they didn’t treat youto the story of that little spree.”Gatsby walked over and stood beside her.“Daisy, that’s all over now,” he said earnestly.

“It doesn’t matterany more.

Just tell him the truth—that you never loved him—and it’sall wiped out forever.”She looked at him blindly.

“Why—how could I love him—possibly?”“You never loved him.”She hesitated.

Her eyes fell on Jordan and me with a sort of appeal,as though she realized at last what she was doing—and as though shehad never, all along, intended doing anything at all.

But it was donenow.

“There, Jay,” she said—but her hand as she triedto light a cigarette was trembling.

Suddenly she threw the cigaretteand the burning match on the carpet.“Oh, you want too much!” she cried to Gatsby.

“I love you now—isn’tthat enough?

I can’t help what’s past.” She began to sobhelplessly.

“She didn’t know you werealive.

I’m going to take better care of you from nowon.”“You don’t understand,” said Gatsby, with a touch of panic.

“You’renot going to take care of her any more.”“I’m not?” Tom opened his eyes wide and laughed.

He could afford tocontrol himself now.

“Oh, please let’s get out.”“Who are you, anyhow?” broke out Tom.

That’s one of his little stunts.

“I guess your friend WalterChase wasn’t too proud to come in on it.”“And you left him in the lurch, didn’t you?

You let him go to jail fora month over in New Jersey.

God!

You ought to hear Walter on thesubject of you.”“He came to us dead broke.

He was very glad to pick up some money, oldsport.”“Don’t you call me ‘old sport’!” cried Tom.

Gatsby saidnothing.

Then I turned back toGatsby—and was startled at his expression.

He won’t annoy you.

Jordan?

Tom talked incessantly, exulting and laughing, buthis voice was as remote from Jordan and me as the foreign clamour onthe sidewalk or the tumult of the elevated overhead.

Human sympathyhas its limits, and we were content to let all their tragic argumentsfade with the city lights behind.

Thirty—the promise of a decade ofloneliness, a thinning list of single men to know, a thinningbriefcase of enthusiasm, thinning hair.

Michaelis advised him to goto bed, but Wilson refused, saying that he’d miss a lot of business ifhe did.

When anyone spoke to him he invariablylaughed in an agreeable, colourless way.

Just as the latter was getting uneasy, someworkmen came past the door bound for his restaurant, and Michaelistook the opportunity to get away, intending to come back later.

But hedidn’t.

He supposed he forgot to, that’s all.

Mavro Michaelis wasn’t even sure ofits colour—he told the first policeman that it was light green.

“That’s good.

Then he made a harsh sound in his throat, and with aviolent thrusting movement of his powerful arms pushed his waythrough.The circle closed up again with a running murmur of expostulation; itwas a minute before I could see anything at all.

Next to him stood a motorcycle policeman takingdown names with much sweat and correction in a little book.

Some man was talking to him in a lowvoice and attempting, from time to time, to lay a hand on hisshoulder, but Wilson neither heard nor saw.

Oh, my Ga-od!

Oh, Ga-od!

Ins’antly killed.”“Instantly killed,” repeated Tom, staring.“She ran out ina road.

New.”“See the accident?” asked the policeman.“No, but the car passed me down the road, going faster’n forty.

Goingfifty, sixty.”“Come here and let’s have your name.

Look out now.

“I just got here a minuteago, from New York.

I was bringing you that coupé we’ve been talkingabout.

That yellow car I was driving this afternoon wasn’t mine—do youhear?

He watched while the two men standing closest glancedat each other and went unwillingly into the room.

Then Tom shut thedoor on them and came down the single step, his eyes avoiding thetable.

“He didn’t even stop his car.”------------------------------------------------------------------------The Buchanans’ house floated suddenly toward us through the darkrustling trees.

Tom stopped beside the porch and looked up at thesecond floor, where two windows bloomed with light among the vines.“Daisy’s home,” he said.

“Come in.”“No, thanks.

But I’d be glad if you’d order me the taxi.

She must have seen something ofthis in my expression, for she turned abruptly away and ran up theporch steps into the house.

I sat down for a few minutes with my headin my hands, until I heard the phone taken up inside and the butler’svoice calling a taxi.

It’s better that the shockshould all come at once.

Her husband owns the garage.

It all happened in a minute, butit seemed to me that she wanted to speak to us, thought we weresomebody she knew.

Well, first Daisy turned away from the woman towardthe other car, and then she lost her nerve and turned back.

“Anyhow—Daisy stepped on it.

Itried to make her stop, but she couldn’t, so I pulled on the emergencybrake.

Then she fell over into my lap and I drove on.“She’ll be all right tomorrow,” he said presently.

“I’m just going towait here and see if he tries to bother her about that unpleasantnessthis afternoon.

She’s locked herself into her room, and if he triesany brutality she’s going to turn the light out and on again.”“He won’t touch her,” I said.

Anyhow, till they all go to bed.”A new point of view occurred to me.

Suppose Tom found out that Daisyhad been driving.

He might think he saw a connection in it—he mightthink anything.

I looked at the house; there were two or three brightwindows downstairs and the pink glow from Daisy’s room on the groundfloor.“You wait here,” I said.

“I’ll see if there’s any sign of acommotion.”I walked back along the border of the lawn, traversed the gravelsoftly, and tiptoed up the veranda steps.

The drawing-room curtainswere open, and I saw that the room was empty.

He was talking intently across the table at her, and in hisearnestness his hand had fallen upon and covered her own.

Once in awhile she looked up at him and nodded in agreement.They weren’t happy, and neither of them had touched the chicken or theale—and yet they weren’t unhappy either.

Good night, old sport.”He put his hands in his coat pockets and turned back eagerly to hisscrutiny of the house, as though my presence marred the sacredness ofthe vigil.

So I walked away and left him standing there in themoonlight—watching over nothing.

“I waited, and about four o’clockshe came to the window and stood there for a minute and then turnedout the light.”His house had never seemed so enormous to me as it did that night whenwe hunted through the great rooms for cigarettes.

There was an inexplicableamount of dust everywhere, and the rooms were musty, as though theyhadn’t been aired for many days.

I found the humidor on an unfamiliartable, with two stale, dry cigarettes inside.

Throwing open the Frenchwindows of the drawing-room, we sat smoking out into the darkness.“You ought to go away,” I said.

He couldn’t possibly leave Daisy until heknew what she was going to do.

I think that he would have acknowledged anything now, withoutreserve, but he wanted to talk about Daisy.She was the first “nice” girl he had ever known.

In various unrevealedcapacities he had come in contact with such people, but always withindiscernible barbed wire between.

He found her excitinglydesirable.

He went to her house, at first with other officers fromCamp Taylor, then alone.

It amazed him—he had never been in such abeautiful house before.

But what gave it an air of breathlessintensity, was that Daisy lived there—it was as casual a thing to heras his tent out at camp was to him.

It excited him, too, that many men had already lovedDaisy—it increased her value in his eyes.

So hemade the most of his time.

He had intended, probably, to take what he could and go—butnow he found that he had committed himself to the following of agrail.

He knew that Daisy was extraordinary, but he didn’t realizejust how extraordinary a “nice” girl could be.

She vanished into herrich house, into her rich, full life, leaving Gatsby—nothing.

Her porch was bright with the boughtluxury of star-shine; the wicker of the settee squeaked fashionably asshe turned toward him and he kissed her curious and lovely mouth.

I even hoped for a while that she’d throw me over, but shedidn’t, because she was in love with me too.

It was a cold fall day, with fire in theroom and her cheeks flushed.

Now and then she moved and he changed hisarm a little, and once he kissed her dark shining hair.

The afternoonhad made them tranquil for a while, as if to give them a deep memoryfor the long parting the next day promised.

He was a captain before hewent to the front, and following the Argonne battles he got hismajority and the command of the divisional machine-guns.

After thearmistice he tried frantically to get home, but some complication ormisunderstanding sent him to Oxford instead.

He was worried now—therewas a quality of nervous despair in Daisy’s letters.

She didn’t seewhy he couldn’t come.

And all the time something within her was crying for adecision.

Doubtless there was a certainstruggle and a certain relief.

“You must remember, old sport, she wasvery excited this afternoon.

The day-coach—he was pennilessnow—was hot.

He went out to the open vestibule and sat down on afolding-chair, and the station slid away and the backs of unfamiliarbuildings moved by.

He stretched out his handdesperately as if to snatch only a wisp of air, to save a fragment ofthe spot that she had made lovely for him.

But it was all going by toofast now for his blurred eyes and he knew that he had lost that partof it, the freshest and the best, forever.It was nine o’clock when we finished breakfast and went out on theporch.

The night had made a sharp difference in the weather and therewas an autumn flavour in the air.

Leaves’ll startfalling pretty soon, and then there’s always trouble with the pipes.”“Don’t do it today,” Gatsby answered.

Just before I reached the hedge Iremembered something and turned around.“They’re a rotten crowd,” I shouted across the lawn.

“You’re worth thewhole damn bunch put together.”I’ve always been glad I said that.

His gorgeous pink rag of a suit made a bright spot ofcolour against the white steps, and I thought of the night when Ifirst came to his ancestral home, three months before.

Various—”We talked like that for a while, and then abruptly we weren’t talkingany longer.

I don’t know which of us hung up with a sharp click, but Iknow I didn’t care.

I couldn’t have talked to her across a tea-tablethat day if I never talked to her again in this world.I called Gatsby’s house a few minutes later, but the line was busy.

Itried four times; finally an exasperated central told me the wire wasbeing kept open for long distance from Detroit.

Taking out mytimetable, I drew a small circle around the three-fifty train.

Then Ileaned back in my chair and tried to think.

When they convinced her of this, sheimmediately fainted, as if that was the intolerable part of theaffair.

For a while the door of the office was open, andeveryone who came into the garage glanced irresistibly through it.Finally someone said it was a shame, and closed the door.

Michaelisand several other men were with him; first, four or five men, latertwo or three men.

Still later Michaelis had to ask the last strangerto wait there fifteen minutes longer, while he went back to his ownplace and made a pot of coffee.

Michaelis made a clumsy attemptto distract him.“How long have you been married, George?

Come on there, try and sitstill a minute, and answer my question.

How long have you beenmarried?”“Twelve years.”“Ever had any children?

Come on, George, sit still—I asked you aquestion.

Maybe even if youhaven’t been there for a long time?

You musthave gone to church once.

Didn’t you get married in a church?

Listen,George, listen to me.

There was nothing in itbut a small, expensive dog-leash, made of leather and braidedsilver.

It was apparently new.“This?” he inquired, holding it up.Wilson stared and nodded.“I found it yesterday afternoon.

“This has been a strain toyou and you don’t know what you’re saying.

His eyes narrowed and his mouth widenedslightly with the ghost of a superior “Hm!”“I know,” he said definitely.

It was the man in that car.

She ran out to speak to him and hewouldn’t stop.”Michaelis had seen this too, but it hadn’t occurred to him that therewas any special significance in it.

He was glad a little laterwhen he noticed a change in the room, a blue quickening by the window,and realized that dawn wasn’t far off.

“I told her shemight fool me but she couldn’t fool God.

Something made himturn away from the window and look back into the room.

It was one of the watchers of the night beforewho had promised to come back, so he cooked breakfast for three, whichhe and the other man ate together.

He must have been tired andwalking slowly, for he didn’t reach Gad’s Hill until noon.

Then for three hours he disappearedfrom view.

The police, on the strength of what he said to Michaelis,that he “had a way of finding out,” supposed that he spent that timegoing from garage to garage thereabout, inquiring for a yellow car.

Onthe other hand, no garage man who had seen him ever came forward, andperhaps he had an easier, surer way of finding out what he wanted toknow.

He stopped at the garage for a pneumatic mattress that hadamused his guests during the summer, and the chauffeur helped him topump it up.

Then he gave instructions that the open car wasn’t to betaken out under any circumstances—and this was strange, because thefront right fender needed repair.Gatsby shouldered the mattress and started for the pool.

I have an idea that Gatsby himself didn’tbelieve it would come, and perhaps he no longer cared.

If that wastrue he must have felt that he had lost the old warm world, paid ahigh price for living too long with a single dream.

He must havelooked up at an unfamiliar sky through frightening leaves and shiveredas he found what a grotesque thing a rose is and how raw the sunlightwas upon the scarcely created grass.

I drove from the station directly to Gatsby’s houseand my rushing anxiously up the front steps was the first thing thatalarmed anyone.

But they knew then, I firmly believe.

A small gust of wind thatscarcely corrugated the surface was enough to disturb its accidentalcourse with its accidental burden.

IXAfter two years I remember the rest of that day, and that night andthe next day, only as an endless drill of police and photographers andnewspaper men in and out of Gatsby’s front door.

A rope stretchedacross the main gate and a policeman by it kept out the curious, butlittle boys soon discovered that they could enter through my yard, andthere were always a few of them clustered open-mouthed about thepool.

She convincedherself of it, and cried into her handkerchief, as if the verysuggestion was more than she could endure.

So Wilson was reduced to aman “deranged by grief” in order that the case might remain in itssimplest form.

And it rested there.But all this part of it seemed remote and unessential.

I found myselfon Gatsby’s side, and alone.

How I could reach them?”“I don’t know.

Can’t say.”I wanted to get somebody for him.

I wanted to go into the room wherehe lay and reassure him: “I’ll get somebody for you, Gatsby.

Don’tworry.

I’m afraid no one’s there.”I went back to the drawing-room and thought for an instant that theywere chance visitors, all these official people who suddenly filledit.

But, though they drew back the sheet and looked at Gatsby withshocked eyes, his protest continued in my brain:“Look here, old sport, you’ve got to get somebody for me.

You’ve gotto try hard.

That request seemed superfluous when I wrote it.

Dear Mr. Carraway.

This has been one of the most terrible shocks of my life to me I hardly can believe it that it is true at all.

Such a mad act as that man did should make us all think.

I cannot come down now as I am tied up in some very important business and cannot get mixed up in this thing now.

If there is anything I can do a little later let me know in a letter by Edgar.

I hardly know where I am when I hear about a thing like this and am completely knocked down and out.

Get my wire?”“There haven’t been any wires.”“Young Parke’s in trouble,” he said rapidly.

“They picked him up whenhe handed the bonds over the counter.

They got a circular from NewYork giving ’em the numbers just five minutes before.

What d’you knowabout that, hey?

You never can tell in these hick towns—”“Hello!” I interrupted breathlessly.

“Look here—this isn’t Mr.Gatsby.

But he wouldn’t eat, andthe glass of milk spilled from his trembling hand.“I saw it in the Chicago newspaper,” he said.

“It was all in theChicago newspaper.

I started right away.”“I didn’t know how to reach you.”His eyes, seeing nothing, moved ceaselessly about the room.“It was a madman,” he said.

I’m all right now, Mr.—”“Carraway.”“Well, I’m all right now.

Where have they got Jimmy?”I took him into the drawing-room, where his son lay, and left himthere.

He had reached an age where death no longer has thequality of ghastly surprise, and when he looked around him now for thefirst time and saw the height and splendour of the hall and the greatrooms opening out from it into other rooms, his grief began to bemixed with an awed pride.

Gatz.

I thought you might want to take the body West.”He shook his head.“Jimmy always liked it better down East.

He rose up to his position inthe East.

Were you a friend of my boy’s, Mr.—?”“We were close friends.”“He had a big future before him, you know.

A man like James J.Hill.

“This is Klipspringer.”I was relieved too, for that seemed to promise another friend atGatsby’s grave.

I didn’t want it to be in the papers and draw asightseeing crowd, so I’d been calling up a few people myself.

Theywere hard to find.“The funeral’s tomorrow,” I said.

“Three o’clock, here at the house.I wish you’d tell anybody who’d be interested.”“Oh, I will,” he broke out hastily.

What I called up about is—”“Wait a minute,” I interrupted.

In fact, there’s a sort of picnic or something.

I wonder ifit’d be too much trouble to have the butler send them on.

You see,they’re tennis shoes, and I’m sort of helpless without them.

But when I’d shouted “hello” several times in vain, anargument broke out behind a partition, and presently a lovely Jewessappeared at an interior door and scrutinized me with black hostileeyes.“Nobody’s in,” she said.

“Mr.

“We’re getting sickantired of it.

“Will you just—What was yourname?”She vanished.

In a moment Meyer Wolfshiem stood solemnly in thedoorway, holding out both hands.

“A young majorjust out of the army and covered over with medals he got in the war.He was so hard up he had to keep on wearing his uniform because hecouldn’t buy some regular clothes.

He hadn’t eat anything for a couple of days.

‘Come on have somelunch with me,’ I said.

I made him.”“Oh.”“I raised him up out of nothing, right out of the gutter.

I got him to jointhe American Legion and he used to stand high there.

Right off he didsome work for a client of mine up to Albany.

It’s all over now.”“When a man gets killed I never like to get mixed up in it in anyway.

I keep out.

When I was a young man it was different—if a friendof mine died, no matter how, I stuck with them to the end.

After changing my clothes I went next door and foundMr.

Gatz walking up and down excitedly in the hall.

“Look there.”It was a photograph of the house, cracked in the corners and dirtywith many hands.

He pointed out every detail to me eagerly.

“Lookthere!” and then sought admiration from my eyes.

He had shown it sooften that I think it was more real to him now than the house itself.“Jimmy sent it to me.

I think it’s a very pretty picture.

It shows upwell.”“Very well.

Had you seen him lately?”“He come out to see me two years ago and bought me the house I live innow.

Of course we was broke up when he run off from home, but I seenow there was a reason for it.

He knew he had a big future in front ofhim.

And ever since he made a success he was very generous with me.”He seemed reluctant to put away the picture, held it for anotherminute, lingeringly, before my eyes.

Then he returned the wallet andpulled from his pocket a ragged old copy of a book called HopalongCassidy.“Look here, this is a book he had when he was a boy.

It just showsyou.”He opened it at the back cover and turned it around for me to see.

Onthe last flyleaf was printed the word schedule, and the date September12, 1906.

7:15-8:15 ”    Work                                           8:30-4:30 p.m.

He always had some resolves like thisor something.

Do you notice what he’s got about improving his mind?

Hewas always great for that.

So didGatsby’s father.

And as the time passed and the servants came in andstood waiting in the hall, his eyes began to blink anxiously, and hespoke of the rain in a worried, uncertain way.

The minister glancedseveral times at his watch, so I took him aside and asked him to waitfor half an hour.

But it wasn’t any use.

As westarted through the gate into the cemetery I heard a car stop and thenthe sound of someone splashing after us over the soggy ground.

Ilooked around.

I don’t know how he knew about thefuneral, or even his name.

“Why, my God!

the Herseys’?

the Schultzes’?” and the longgreen tickets clasped tight in our gloved hands.

West Egg, especially, still figures in my more fantasticdreams.

In the foreground four solemn men in dresssuits are walking along the sidewalk with a stretcher on which lies adrunken woman in a white evening dress.

Her hand, which dangles overthe side, sparkles cold with jewels.

Gravely the men turn in at ahouse—the wrong house.

When I had finished she told me withoutcomment that she was engaged to another man.

I doubted that, thoughthere were several she could have married at a nod of her head, but Ipretended to be surprised.

“You threwme over on the telephone.

I mean it was careless of meto make such a wrong guess.

I thought you were rather an honest,straightforward person.

I thought it was your secret pride.”“I’m thirty,” I said.

“I’m five years too old to lie to myself andcall it honour.”She didn’t answer.

Just asI slowed up to avoid overtaking him he stopped and began frowning intothe windows of a jewellery store.

Suddenly he saw me and walked back,holding out his hand.“What’s the matter, Nick?

Do you object to shaking hands with me?”“Yes.

You know what I think of you.”“You’re crazy, Nick,” he said quickly.

“Crazy as hell.

I started to turn away, but he took a step afterme and grabbed my arm.“I told him the truth,” he said.

“He came to the door while we weregetting ready to leave, and when I sent down word that we weren’t inhe tried to force his way upstairs.

He was crazy enough to kill me ifI hadn’t told him who owned the car.

That fellow had it coming to him.

He threwdust into your eyes just like he did in Daisy’s, but he was a toughone.

ByGod it was awful—”I couldn’t forgive him or like him, but I saw that what he had donewas, to him, entirely justified.

It was all very careless andconfused.

One night I did hear amaterial car there, and saw its lights stop at his front steps.

But Ididn’t investigate.

Probably it was some final guest who had been awayat the ends of the earth and didn’t know that the party was over.On the last night, with my trunk packed and my car sold to the grocer,I went over and looked at that huge incoherent failure of a house oncemore.

On the white steps an obscene word, scrawled by some boy with apiece of brick, stood out clearly in the moonlight, and I erased it,drawing my shoe raspingly along the stone.

He had come a long way to this blue lawn, and his dreammust have seemed so close that he could hardly fail to grasp it.

can copy and distribute it in theUnited States without permission and without paying copyrightroyalties.

You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creationof derivative works, reports, performances and research.

"Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.

It may only beused on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people whoagree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.

Seeparagraph 1.C below.

See paragraph 1.E below.1.C.

Nearly all the individualworks in the collection are in the public domain in the UnitedStates.

The copyright laws of the place where you are located also governwhat you can do with this work.

Copyright laws in most countries arein a constant state of change.

Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:1.E.1.

Royalty payments must be paid  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns.

You must require such a user to return or destroy all  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of  receipt of the work.

If youreceived the work on a physical medium, you must return the mediumwith your written explanation.

The person or entity that provided youwith the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy inlieu of a refund.

Ifthe second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writingwithout further opportunities to fix the problem.1.F.4.

We do not solicit donations in locationswhere we have not received written confirmation of compliance.

Donations are accepted in a number of otherways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.

Todonate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donateSection 5.

