I do the very best I know how-the very best I can; and I mean to keep doing so until the end. If the end brings me out all right, what is said against me won't amount to anything. If the end brings me out wrong, ten angels swearing I was right would make no difference.
The less their ability, the more their conceit.
Great ability develops and reveals itself increasingly with every new assignment.
Natural ability without education has more often attained to glory and virtue than education without natural ability.
Be systematically heroic in little unnecessary points, do every day or two something for no other reason than its difficulty, so that, when the hour of need draws nigh, it may find you not unnerved or untrained to stand the test.
The trick of it, she told herself, is to be courageous and bold and make a difference. Not change the world exactly, just the bit around you. Go out there with your double-first, your passion and your new Smith Corona electric typewriter and work hard at ... something. Change lives through art maybe. Write beautifully. Cherish your friends, stay true to your principles, live passionately and fully well. Experience new things. Love and be loved if at all possible. Eat sensibly. Stuff like that.
It is a great ability to be able to conceal one's ability.
Martyrdom... is the only way in which a man can become famous without ability.
I know of no more encouraging fact than the unquestioned ability of a man to elevate his life by conscious endeavor.
Ability will never catch up with the demand for it.
Dressing up is inevitably a substitute for good ideas. It is no coincidence that technically inept business types are known as "suits."
Nerds don't just happen to dress informally. They do it too consistently. Consciously or not, they dress informally as a prophylactic measure against stupidity.
There is something that is much more scarce, something rarer than ability. It is the ability to recognize ability.
Perhaps the most valuable result of all education is the ability to make yourself do the thing you have to do, when it ought to be done, whether you like it or not; it is the first lesson that ought to be learned; and however early a man's training begins, it is probably the last lesson that he learns thoroughly.
The Army has carried the American ... ideal to its logical conclusion. Not only do they prohibit discrimination on the grounds of race, creed and color, but also on ability.
I do not regret one professional enemy I have made. Any actor who doesn't dare to make an enemy should get out of the business.
Acting is all about honesty. If you can fake that, you've got it made.
Talk low, talk slow, and don't talk too much.
Acting is not being emotional, but being able to express emotion.
Acting is the most minor of gifts and not a very high-class way to earn a living. After all, Shirley Temple could do it at the age of four.
Being a celebrity has taught me to hide, but being an actor has opened my soul.
Empathy is at the heart of the actor's art.
One is obliged to do a great deal of kissing in my line of work: air kissing, [butt] kissing, kissing up, and of course actual kissing. Much like hookers, actors have to do it with people we may not like or even know.
Pretending is not just play. Pretending is imagined possibility. Pretending, or acting, is a very valuable life skill and we do it all the time.
While I am overwhelmingly proud of work that I, believe me, did not do on my own, I can assure you that awards have very little bearing on my own personal happiness, my own sense of well-being and purpose in the world.
Women are better at acting then men. Why? Because we have to be. If successfully convincing someone bigger than you are of something he doesn't want to know is a survival skill, this is how women have survived through the millennia.
There's a rule in acting called, "Don't play the result." If you have a character who's going to end up in a certain place, don't play that until you get there. Play each scene and each beat as it comes. And that's what you do in life: You don't play the result.
The most difficult character in comedy is that of a fool, and he must be no simpleton who plays the part.
I love acting. It is so much more real than life.
Acting like someone you're not is exactly what it takes to realize you're capable of more than you ever knew.
I enjoy being a highly overpaid actor.
Acting is merely the art of keeping a large group of people from coughing.
When a man plays a woman in a dress, you're halfway there. It's inherently funny. When a woman plays a man, for whatever reason, it's not that instant kind of funny.
You can be a little bit darker and rougher on the stage, partly because when you're in the theater, people have come to see you, and so they kind of know what they're in for. In television, you are sort of sneaking into people's homes. So, I think you can be a little bit darker on stage.
We're actors - we're the opposite of people.
We have too many high sounding words, and too few actions that correspond with them.
I've arrived at this outermost edge of my life by my own actions. Where I am is thoroughly unacceptable. Therefore, I must stop doing what I've been doing.
All human actions have one or more of these seven causes: chance, nature, compulsion, habit, reason, passion, and desire.
Men acquire a particular quality by constantly acting a particular way... you become just by performing just actions, temperate by performing temperate actions, brave by performing brave actions.
Actions lie louder than words.
Deliberation is the function of the many; action is the function of one.
The superior man is modest in his speech, but exceeds in his actions.
You cannot have a proud and chivalrous spirit if your conduct is mean and paltry; for whatever a man's actions are, such must be his spirit.
I have long since come to believe that people never mean half of what they say, and that it is best to disregard their talk and judge only their actions.
An event had happened, upon which it is difficult to speak, and impossible to be silent.
Action is character.
You ask me why I do not write something....I think one's feelings waste themselves in words, they ought all to be distilled into actions and into actions which bring results.
Happiness lies not in the mere possession of money. It lies in the joy of achievement, in the thrill of creative effort.
We defend and we build a way of life, not for America alone, but for all mankind.
When a man asks himself what is meant by action he proves he is not a man of action. Action is a lack of balance. In order to act you must be somewhat insane. A reasonably sensible man is satisfied with thinking.
Somewhere deep down we know that in the final analysis we do decide things and that even our decisions to let someone else decide are really our decisions, however pusillanimous.
Words without actions are the assassins of idealism.
Only actions give life strength; only moderation gives it a charm.
I have always thought the actions of men the best interpreters of their thoughts.
I was seldom able to see an opportunity until it had ceased to be one.
Don't be too timid and squeamish about your actions. All life is an experiment. The more experiments you make the better.
Life is one long process of getting tired.
Nothing will ever be attempted if all possible objections must be first overcome.
In this theater of man's life, it is reserved only for God and for angels to be lookers-on.
Aggressive fighting for the right is the greatest sport in the world.
We are face to face with our destiny and we must meet it with high and resolute courage. For us is the life of action, of strenuous performance of duty; let us live in the harness, striving mightily; let us rather run the risk of wearing out than rusting out.
Delay is preferable to error.
Nearly all men can stand adversity, but if you want to test a man's character, give him power.
If we had no winter, the spring would not be so pleasant: if we did not sometimes taste of adversity, prosperity would not be so welcome.
By courage I repel adversity. (Adversa Virtute Repello)
He knows not his own strength that hath not met adversity.
Be more prompt to go to a friend in adversity than in prosperity.
Friendship make prosperity more shining and lessens adversity by dividing and sharing it.
Adversity is the touchstone of friendship.
Adversity is the trial of principle. Without it a man hardly knows whether he is honest or not.
He that can heroically endure adversity will bear prosperity with equal greatness of the soul; for the mind that cannot be dejected by the former is not likely to be transported without the latter.
In adversity remember to keep an even mind.
You will never truly know yourself or the strength of your relationships until both have been tested by adversity.
In prosperity our friends know us; in adversity we know our friends.
Adversity does teach who your real friends are.
By trying we can easily learn to endure adversity -- another man's I mean.
By trying we can easily learn to endure adversity. Another man's, I mean.
Always seek out the seed of triumph in every adversity.
Prosperity makes friends, adversity tries them.
Adversity is the state in which man most easily becomes acquainted with himself, being especially free of admirers then.
Fire is the test of gold; adversity, of strong men.
Remember that there is nothing stable in human affairs; therefore avoid undue elation in prosperity, or undue depression in adversity.
Adversity causes some men to break; others to break records.
A man I am cross'd with adversity.
A wretched soul, bruised with adversity, We bid be quiet when we hear it cry;  But were we burdened with like weight of pain, As much or more we should ourselves complain.
Let me embrace thee, sour adversity, for wise men say it is the wisest course.
Sweet are the uses of adversity,  Which like the toad, ugly and venomous,  Wears yet a precious jewel in his head;  And this our life, exempt from public haunt,  Finds tongues in trees, books in the running brooks,  Sermons in stones, and good in everything.
Sweet are the uses of adversity, which, like a toad, though ugly and venomous, wears yet a precious jewel in its head. 
I LIKE ads. It's not that we don't like ads, we just don't like ads when they are out of place.
The very first law in advertising is to avoid the concrete promise and cultivate the delightfully vague.
Advertising is the modern substitute for argument; its function is to make the worse appear the better.
If people aren't going to talk about your product, then it's not good enough.
Half the money I spend on advertising is wasted; the trouble is I don't know which half.
Many a small thing has been made large by the right kind of advertising.
You can tell the ideals of a nation by its advertisements.
Chess is as elaborate a waste of human intelligence as you can find outside an advertising agency.
Advertising is a valuable economic factor because it is the cheapest way of selling goods, particularly if the goods are worthless.
Advertising may be described as the science of arresting the human intelligence long enough to get money from it.
Advertisements... contain the only truths to be relied on in a newspaper.
I read no newspaper now but Ritchie's, and in that chiefly the advertisements, for they contain the only truths to be relied on in a newspaper.
What is the difference between unethical and ethical advertising? Unethical advertising uses falsehoods to deceive the public; ethical advertising uses truth to deceive the public.
Never trust the advice of a man in difficulties.
It is very difficult to live among people you love and hold back from offering them advice.
People who ask our advice almost never take it. Yet we should never refuse to give it, upon request, for it often helps us to see our own way more clearly.
Ask advice only of your equals.
Please give me some good advice in your next letter. I promise not to follow it.
Don't give advice. It will come back and bite you in the [butt]. Don't take anyone's advice. So, my advice to you is to be true to yourself and everything will be fine.
Write down the advice of him who loves you, though you like it not at present.
Advice is what we ask for when we already know the answer but wish we didn't.
Good advice is something a man gives when he is too old to set a bad example.
I owe my success to having listened respectfully to the very best advice, and then going away and doing the exact opposite.
Never give advice unless asked.
Some people like my advice so much that they frame it upon the wall instead of using it.
There is no human problem which could not be solved if people would simply do as I advise.
The true secret of giving advice is, after you have honestly given it, to be perfectly indifferent whether it is taken or not, and never persist in trying to set people right.
I have found the best way to give advice to your children is to find out what they want and then advise them to do it.
No-one wants advice only corroboration.
The only thing to do with good advice is pass it on. It is never any use to oneself.
Don't try to solve serious matters in the middle of the night.
The advice of friends must be received with a judicious reserve; we must not give ourselves up to it and follow it blindly, whether right or wrong.
Many receive advice, few profit by it.
Advice is very easy to give, and even easier not to follow, so I don't fool with it.
It seems that bad advice that's fun will always be better known than than good advice that's dull-no matter how useless that fun advice is.
Never take the advice of someone who has not had your kind of trouble.
In giving advice, seek to help, not please, your friend.
Never advise anyone to go to war or to marry.
Be yourself is the worst advice you can give to some people.
Don't be a dick!
Wisdom doesn't automatically come with old age. Nothing does - except wrinkles. It's true, some wines improve with age. But only if the grapes were good in the first place.
I have enjoyed greatly the second blooming... suddenly you find - at the age of 50, say - that a whole new life has opened before you.
The deepest definition of youth is life as yet untouched by tragedy.
Growing old is no more than a bad habit which a busy man has no time to form.
You can only perceive real beauty in a person as they get older.
Young people are in a condition like permanent intoxication, because youth is sweet and they are growing.
At twenty years of age the will reigns; at thirty the wit; at forty the judgement.
Beware of the young doctor and the old barber.
By my rambling digressions I perceive myself to be growing old.
I will never be an old man. To me, old age is always 15 years older than I am.
To me, old age is always 15 years older than I am.
Aging is not 'lost youth' but a new stage of opportunity and strength.
There is no old age. There is, as there always was, just you.
Always be nice to those younger than you, because they are the ones who will be writing about you.
The great secret that all old people share is that you really haven't changed in 70 or 80 years. Your body changes, but you don't change at all.
The surprising thing about young fools is how many survive to become old fools.
I'm very pleased with each advancing year. It stems back to when I was forty. I was a bit upset about reaching that milestone, but an older friend consoled me. 'Don't complain about growing old - many, many people do not have that privilege.'
In spite of illness, in spite even of the archenemy sorrow, one can remain alive long past the usual date of disintegration if one is unafraid of change, insatiable in intellectual curiosity, interested in big things, and happy in small ways.
Old age, calm, expanded, broad with the haughty breadth of the universe, old age flowing free with the delicious near-by freedom of death.
It is a sadness of growing older that we lose our ardent appreciation of what is new and different and difficult.
With age come the inner, the higher life. Who would be forever young, to dwell always in externals?
Though it sounds absurd, it is true to say I felt younger at sixty than I felt at twenty.
That is the greatest fallacy, the wisdom of old men. They do not grow wise. They grow careful.
Only when one has lost all curiosity about the future has one reached the age to write an autobiography.
I grow more intense as I age.
The longer I live the more beautiful life becomes.
You're an old-timer if you can remember when setting the world on fire was a figure of speech.
Old age is like everything else. To make a success of it, you've got to start young.
It is kind of strange watching your personal history become costume.
Age to me means nothing. I can't get old; I'm working. I was old when I was twenty-one and out of work. As long as you're working, you stay young. When I'm in front of an audience, all that love and vitality sweeps over me and I forget my age.
My idea of an agreeable person is a person who agrees with me.
It is by universal misunderstanding that all agree. For if, by ill luck, people understood each other, they would never agree.
Those who agree with us may not be right, but we admire their astuteness.
Your very silence shows you agree.
We rarely think people have good sense unless they agree with us.
If men would consider not so much wherein they differ, as wherein they agree, there would be far less of uncharitableness and angry feeling.
If two men agree on everything, you may be sure that one of them is doing the thinking.
I don't necessarily agree with everything I say.
If you can find something everyone agrees on, it's wrong.
To disagree with three-fourths of the British public is one of the first requisites of sanity.
Whenever people agree with me I always feel I must be wrong.
The greatest mistake is trying to be more agreeable than you can be.
When two men in business always agree, one of them is unnecessary.
Ambition is putting a ladder against the sky.
The universe is not required to be in perfect harmony with human ambition.
Ambition is a poor excuse for not having sense enough to be lazy.
The nature of society is largely determined by the direction in which talent and ambition flow-by the tilt of the social landscape.
What seems to be generosity is often no more than disguised ambition, which overlooks a small interest in order to secure a great one.
Most people would succeed in small things if they were not troubled with great ambitions.
Ambition - it is the last infirmity of noble minds.
Ambition often puts men upon doing the meanest offices; so climbing is performed in the same posture with creeping.
All ambitions are lawful except those that climb upward on the miseries or credulities of mankind.
It's delightful to have ambitions. I'm so glad I have such a lot. And there never seems to be any end to them—that's the best of it. Just as soon as you attain to one ambition you see another one glittering higher up still. It does make life so interesting.
Dreams, goals, ambitions - these are the stuff man uses for fuel.
Keep away from people who try to belittle your ambitions. Small people always do that, but the really great make you feel that you, too, can become great.
He who blinded by ambition, raises himself to a position whence he cannot mount higher, must thereafter fall with the greatest loss.
A man without ambition is dead. A man with ambition but no love is dead. A man with ambition and love for his blessings here on earth is ever so alive. Having been alive, it won't be so hard in the end to lie down and rest.
Though ambition itself be a vice, yet it is often times the cause of virtues.
Men are more often bribed by their loyalties and ambitions than by money. 
Ambition drove many men to become false; to have one thought locked in the breast, another ready on the tongue.
All ambitions are lawful except those which climb upward on the miseries or credulities of mankind.
Ambition, the soldier's virtue, rather makes choice of loss, than gain which darkens him.
I have no spur to prick the sides of my intent, but only vaulting ambition, which o'erleaps itself, and falls on the other.
I hold ambition of so light a quality that is is but a shadow's shadow.
Lowliness is young ambition's ladder,  Whereto the climber-upward turns his face;  But when he once attains the upmost round,  He then unto the ladder turns his back,  Looks in the clouds, scorning the base degrees  By which he did ascend
Virtue is choked with foul ambition.
In America any boy may become President and I suppose it's just one of the risks he takes.
There is a New America every morning when we wake up. It is upon us whether we will it or not.
America's greatest strength, and its greatest weakness, is our belief in second chances, our belief that we can always start over, that things can be made better.
America is a large, friendly dog in a very small room. Every time it wags its tail, it knocks over a chair.
America, we are better than these last eight years. We are a better country than this.
I know starting careers in troubled times is a challenge, but it is also a privilege. Because it's moments like these that force us to try harder, dig deeper and to discover gifts we never knew we had. To find the greatness that lies within each of us. So don't ever shy away from that endeavor. Don't stop adding to your body of work. I can promise that you will be the better for that continued effort as will be this nation that we all love.
In recent years, we've become enamored with our own past success. Lulled into complacency by the glitter of our own achievements. We've become accustomed to the title of Military Superpower, forgetting the qualities that got us there. We've become accustomed to our economic dominance in the world, forgetting that it wasn't reckless deals and get rich quick schemes that got us where we are, but hard work and smart ideas, quality products and wise investments.
That is the American story. People, just like you, following their passions, determined to meet the times on their own terms. They weren't doing it for the money. Their titles weren't fancy. But they changed the course of history and so can you.
There is nothing wrong with America that cannot be cured by what is right with America.
America's one of the finest countries anyone ever stole.
There's the country of America, which you have to defend, but there's also the idea of America. America is more than just a country, it's an idea. An idea that's supposed to be contagious.
I see America, not in the setting sun of a black night of despair ahead of us, I see America in the crimson light of a rising sun fresh from the burning, creative hand of God. I see great days ahead, great days possible to men and women of will and vision.
The trouble with America is that there are far too many wide-open spaces surrounded by teeth.
America is the greatest, freest and most decent society in existence. It is an oasis of goodness in a desert of cynicism and barbarism. This country, once an experiment unique in the world, is now the last best hope for the world.
There is nothing wrong with America that the faith, love of freedom, intelligence and energy of her citizens cannot cure.
The United States is a nation of laws: badly written and randomly enforced.
America is therefore the land of the future, where, in the ages that lie before us, the burden of the World's History shall reveal itself.
England and America are two countries separated by a common language.
The business of America is not business. Neither is it war. The business of America is justice and securing the blessings of liberty.
America is a young country with an old mentality.
America has never been an empire. We may be the only great power in history that had the chance, and refused – preferring greatness to power and justice to glory.
America has never been united by blood or birth or soil. We are bound by ideals that move us beyond our backgrounds, lift us above our interests and teach us what it means to be citizens.
America will never run... And we will always be grateful that liberty has found such brave defenders.
By heritage and by choice, the United States of America will make that stand.
In the United States there is more space where nobody is than where anybody is. That is what makes America what it is.
What's right about America is that although we have a mess of problems, we have great capacity - intellect and resources - to do some thing about them.
America - a great social and economic experiment, noble in motive and far-reaching in purpose.
I'm not going to quit. Why should I quit? This country is worth fighting for.
This is the story of America. Everybody's doing what they think they're supposed to do.
In a country as big as the United States, you can find fifty examples of anything.
In every American there is an air of incorrigible innocence, which seems to conceal a diabolical cunning.
Too many of us look upon Americans as dollar chasers. This is a cruel libel, even if it is reiterated thoughtlessly by the Americans themselves.
The people reign over the American political world as God rules over the universe. It is the cause and the end of all things; everything rises out of it and is absorbed back into it.
Americans will put up with anything provided it doesn't block traffic.
I was born an American; I will live an American; I shall die an American.
How much longer are we going to think it necessary to be ''American'' before (or in contradistinction to) being cultivated, being enlightened, being humane, and having the same intellectual discipline as other civilized countries?
I sometimes think that the saving grace of America lies in the fact that the overwhelming majority of Americans are possessed of two great qualities- a sense of humor and a sense of proportion.
Americans never quit.
Americans adore me and will go on adoring me until I say something nice about them.
Americans are overreachers; overreaching is the most admirable of the many American excesses.
Half of the American people have never read a newspaper. Half never voted for President. One hopes it is the same half.
Nobody ever went broke underestimating the intelligence of the American public.
The character inherent in the American people has done all that has been accomplished; and it would have done somewhat more, if the government had not sometimes got in its way.
It is, I think, an indisputable fact that Americans are, as Americans, the most self- conscious people in the world, and the most addicted to the belief that the other nations are in a conspiracy to under-value them.
Americans are benevolently ignorant about Canada, while Canadians are malevolently well informed about the United States.
George Washington had a vision for this country. Was it three days of uninterrupted shopping?
The American, by nature, is optimistic. He is experimental, an inventor and a builder who builds best when called upon to build greatly.
This nation was founded by many men of many nations and backgrounds. It was founded on the principle that all men are created equal, and that the rights of every man are diminished when the rights of one man are threatened.
Ninety-eight percent of the adults in this country are decent, hard-working, honest Americans. It's the other lousy two percent that get all the publicity. But then--we elected them.
Sitting at the table doesn't make you a diner, unless you eat some of what's on that plate. Being here in America doesn't make you an American. Being born here in America doesn't make you an American.
An Englishman is a person who does things because they have been done before. An American is a person who does things because they haven't been done before.
The people of the United States, perhaps more than any other nation in history, love to abase themselves and proclaim their unworthiness, and seem to find refreshment in doing so... That is a dark frivolity, but still frivolity.
For the American people are a very generous people and will forgive almost any weakness, with the possible exception of stupidity.
Eat a third and drink a third and leave the remaining third of your stomach empty. Then, when you get angry, there will be sufficient room for your rage.
Anger makes you smaller, while forgiveness forces you to grow beyond what you were.
When anger rises, think of the consequences.
Anger makes dull men witty, but it keeps them poor.
Anger as soon as fed is dead-  'Tis starving makes it fat.
If you do not wish to be prone to anger, do not feed the habit; give it nothing which may tend to its increase.
If you would cure anger, do not feed it. Say to yourself: 'I used to be angry every day; then every other day; now only every third or fourth day.' When you reach thirty days offer a sacrifice of thanksgiving to the gods.
I have seen a peaceful expression turn to anger as fast as a whip cracks, and so the look on the face might mean less than what it seems to be.
Anger at lies lasts forever. Anger at truth can't last.
Anger is a signal, and one worth listening to.
Never forget what a man says to you when he is angry.
Holding on to anger, resentment and hurt only gives you tense muscles, a headache and a sore jaw from clenching your teeth. Forgiveness gives you back the laughter and the lightness in your life.
A child that has a quick temper, just blaze up and cool down, ain't never likely to be sly or deceitful.
Speak when you are angry--and you will make the best speech you'll ever regret.
Usually when people are sad, they don't do anything. They just cry over their condition. But when they get angry, they bring about a change.
How much more grievous are the consequences of anger than the causes of it.
Never get angry. Never make a threat. Reason with people.
I have a right to my anger, and I don't want anybody telling me I shouldn't be, that it's not nice to be, and that something's wrong with me because I get angry.
Science may have found a cure for most evils; but it has found no remedy for the worst of them all - the apathy of human beings.
Choosing to live in narrow spaces leads to form of mental agoraphobia and that brings its own terrors. I think the willfully unimaginative see more monsters, they are often more afraid. What is more, those who choose not to empathize enable real monsters. For without ever committing an act of outright evil ourselves, we collude through our own apathy.
The greatest danger to our future is apathy.
Is sloppiness in speech caused by ignorance or apathy? I don't know and I don't care.
How many a dispute could have been deflated into a single paragraph if the disputants had dared to define their terms.
The Argument from Intimidation is a confession of intellectual impotence.
My parents only had one argument in forty-five years. It lasted forty-three years.
He who strikes the first blow admits he's lost the argument.
I can win an argument on any topic, against any opponent. People know this, and steer clear of me at parties. Often, as a sign of their great respect, they don't even invite me.
Use soft words and hard arguments.
The most perfidious way of harming a cause consists of defending it deliberately with faulty arguments.
The thing I hate about an argument is that it always interrupts a discussion.
No matter what side of the argument you are on, you always find people on your side that you wish were on the other.
That's the beauty of argument-if you argue correctly, you're never wrong.
If you go in for argument, take care of your temper. Your logic, if you have any, will take care of itself.
Silence is one of the hardest arguments to refute.
Behind every argument is someone's ignorance.
Arguments are to be avoided; they are always vulgar and often convincing.
It is not necessary to understand things in order to argue about them.
In a heated argument we are apt to lose sight of the truth.
The argument is at an end.
I learned an important lesson in the art of debate. Present your argument clearly, arm yourself with cutting wit and of course, bob and weave!
It is impossible to defeat an ignorant man in argument.
With reasonable men I will reason; with humane men I will plea; but to tyrants I will give no quarter, nor waste arguments where they will certainly be lost.
For they are yet ear-kissing arguments.
[Abstract art is] a product of the untalented, sold by the unprincipled to the utterly bewildered.
Art is the imposing of a pattern on experience, and our aesthetic enjoyment is recognition of the pattern.
Painting: The art of protecting flat surfaces from the weather and exposing them to the critic.
Art is the desire of a man to express himself, to record the reactions of his personality to the world he lives in.
Art is a collaboration between God and the artist, and the less the artist does the better.
I have often thought that if photography were difficult in the true sense of the term -- meaning that the creation of a simple photograph would entail as much time and effort as the production of a good watercolor or etching -- there would be a vast improvement in total output. The sheer ease with which we can produce a superficial image often leads to creative disaster.
Let each man exercise the art he knows.
The aim of art is to represent not the outward appearance of things, but their inward significance.
Art does not exist only to entertain, but also to challenge one to think, to provoke, even to disturb, in a constant search for truth.
I believe that if it were left to artists to choose their own labels, most would choose none.
So you see, imagination needs moodling - long, inefficient, happy idling, dawdling and puttering.
I suppose no matter what I'm drawing, there will always be some sort of question in my mind about it. A work of art (even cartoon art)is never really finished; it is abandoned.
I can't criticize what I don't understand. If you want to call this art, you've got the benefit of all my doubts.
Art is born of the observation and investigation of nature.
Art forms of the past were really considered elitist. Bach did not compose for the masses, neither did Beethoven. It was always for patrons, aristocrats, and royalty. Now we have a sort of democratic version of that, which is to say that the audience is so splintered in its interests.
The idea of a mass audience was really an invention of the Industrial Revolution.
I don't understand why people think everything has to have meaning. While painting the Mona Lisa did Leonardo Da Vinci intend for it to have greater meaning than a work of art that he made?
If you were in a burning house and there was a cat and a Rembrandt, what would you save? The cat...you would save the cat, because the cat is alive. The art is dead. It's just paint on a canvas, ink on a page. To live for art is to deny life. It's just to destroy life.
I merely took the energy it takes to pout and wrote some blues.
Works of art, in my opinion, are the only objects in the material universe to possess internal order, and that is why, though I don't believe that only art matters, I do believe in Art for Art's sake.
Another unsettling element in modern art is that common symptom of immaturity, the dread of doing what has been done before.
Art is on the side of the oppressed. Think before you shudder at the simplistic dictum and its heretical definition of the freedom of art. For if art is freedom of the spirit, how can it exist within the oppressors?
A painting in a museum hears more ridiculous opinions than anything else in the world.
It is all very well, when the pen flows, but then there are the dark days when imagination deserts one, and it is an effort to put anything down on paper. That little you have achieved stares at you at the end of the day, and you know the next morning you will have to scrape it down and start again.
Illusions are art, for the feeling person, and it is by art that you live, if you do.
Artists who seek perfection in everything are those who cannot attain it in anything.
I don't believe in total freedom for the artist. Left on his own, free to do anything he likes, the artist ends up doing nothing at all. If there's one thing that's dangerous for an artist, it's precisely this question of total freedom, waiting for inspiration and all the rest of it.
Art is making something out of nothing and selling it.
I paint my own reality. The only thing I know is that I paint because I need to, and I paint whatever passes through my head without any other consideration.
Art, like morality, consists of drawing the line somewhere.
The worst moment for the atheist is when he is really thankful and has nobody to thank.
I always admired atheists. I think it takes a lot of faith.
The opposite of the religious fanatic is not the fanatical atheist but the gentle cynic who cares not whether there is a god or not.
I believe in God, only I spell it Nature.
If there were no God, there would be no Atheists.
I have too much respect for the idea of God to make it responsible for such an absurd world.
I'm a born-again atheist.
I once wanted to become an atheist, but I gave up - they have no holidays.
Nobody talks so constantly about God as those who insist that there is no God.
An atheist is a man who has no invisible means of support.
Somebody once asked me if I have anything like faith, and I said I have faith in the narrative. I have a belief in a narrative that is bigger than me, that is alive and I trust will work itself out.
I don't know if God exists, but it would be better for His reputation if He didn't.
I'm the world's least happy atheist. I miss having religious faith, but trying to have it seems like trying to be in love with someone that you're not in love with.
I am an atheist, myself. A simple faith, but a great comfort to me, in these last days.
I'm still an atheist, thank God.
It is the final proof of God's omnipotence that he need not exist in order to save us.
When I told the people of Northern Ireland that I was an atheist, a woman in the audience stood up and said, "Yes, but is it the God of the Catholics or the God of the Protestants in whom you don't believe?"
Religion is about turning untested belief into unshakeable truth through the power of institutions and the passage of time.
We are all atheists about most of the gods that societies have ever believed in. Some of us just go one god further.
You've got your phenomenon on one hand. Concrete and knowable. On the other hand you've got the incomprehensible. You call it God, but to me, God or no, it remains just that, the unknowable.
Ask a deeply religious Christian if he'd rather live next to a bearded Muslim that may or may not be plotting a terror attack, or an atheist that may or may not show him how to set up a wireless network in his house. On the scale of prejudice, atheists don't seem so bad lately.
Shake off all the fears of servile prejudices, under which weak minds are servilely crouched. Fix reason firmly in her seat, and call on her tribunal for every fact, every opinion. Question with boldness even the existence of a God; because, if there be one, he must more approve of the homage of reason than that of blindfolded fear.
If God did not exist, it would be necessary to invent him.
How can I believe in God when just last week I got my tongue caught in the roller of an electric typewriter?
If it turns out that there is a God, I don't think that he's evil. But the worst that you can say about him is that basically he's an underachiever.
To you I'm an atheist; to God, I'm the Loyal Opposition.
Being assertive does not mean attacking or ignoring others feelings. It means that you are willing to hold up for yourself fairly-without attacking others.
Eccentricity is not, as dull people would have us believe, a form of madness. It is often a kind of innocent pride, and the man of genius and the aristocrat are frequently regarded as eccentrics because genius and aristocrat are entirely unafraid of and uninfluenced by the opinions and vagaries of the crowd.
A positive attitude may not solve all your problems, but it will annoy enough people to make it worth the effort.
I happen to feel that the degree of a person's intelligence is directly reflected by the number of conflicting attitudes she can bring to bear on the same topic.
Complaining is good for you as long as you're not complaining to the person you're complaining about.
I am still determined to be cheerful and happy, in whatever situation I may be; for I have also learned from experience that the greater part of our happiness or misery depends upon our dispositions, and not upon our circumstances.
A strong positive mental attitude will create more miracles than any wonder drug.
Human beings, by changing the inner attitudes of their minds, can change the outer aspects of their lives.
The greatest discovery of my generation is that a human being can alter his life by altering his attitudes of mind.
No moral system can rest solely on authority.
To punish me for my contempt for authority, fate made me an authority myself.
The peaceful transfer of authority is rare in history, yet common in our country. With a simple oath, we affirm old traditions and make new beginnings.
Truth is the secret of eloquence and of virtue, the basis of moral authority; it is the highest summit of art and life.
Show me the man who keeps his house in hand,He's fit for public authority.
Every great advance in natural knowledge has involved the absolute rejection of authority.
Wherever there is authority, there is a natural inclination to disobedience.
There is no fettering of authority.
If you wish to know what a man is, place him in authority.
Autumn is a second spring when every leaf is a flower.
When the bold branches Bid farewell to rainbow leaves - Welcome wool sweaters.
Fall is my favorite season in Los Angeles, watching the birds change color and fall from the trees.
For man, autumn is a time of harvest, of gathering together. For nature, it is a time of sowing, of scattering abroad.
A few days ago I walked along the edge of the lake and was treated to the crunch and rustle of leaves with each step I made. The acoustics of this season are different and all sounds, no matter how hushed, are as crisp as autumn air.
The leaves fall, the wind blows, and the farm country slowly changes from the summer cottons into its winter wools.
If winter is slumber and spring is birth, and summer is life, then autumn rounds out to be reflection. It's a time of year when the leaves are down and the harvest is in and the perennials are gone. Mother Earth just closed up the drapes on another year and it's time to reflect on what's come before.
I cannot endure to waste anything as precious as autumn sunshine by staying in the house. So I spend almost all the daylight hours in the open air.
It was one of those perfect English autumnal days which occur more frequently in memory than in life.
There is a harmony In autumn, and a lustre in its sky, Which through the summer is not heard or seen, As if it could not be, as if it had not been!
In the garden, Autumn is, indeed the crowning glory of the year, bringing us the fruition of months of thought and care and toil. And at no season, safe perhaps in Daffodil time, do we get such superb colour effects as from August to November.
Fiery colors begin their yearly conquest of the hills, propelled by the autumn winds. Fall is the artist.
That time of year thou may'st in me behold,  When yellow leaves, or none, or few, do hang  Upon those boughs which shake against the cold,-  Bare ruin'd choirs, where late the sweet birds sang.
It may make your blood boil and your mind may not be changed, but the practice of listening to opposing views is essential for effective citizenship. It is essential for our democracy.
The best and safest thing is to keep a balance in your life, acknowledge the great powers around us and in us. If you can do that, and live that way, you are really a wise man.
We can be sure that the greatest hope for maintaining equilibrium in the face of any situation rests within ourselves.
What I dream of is an art of balance.
So divinely is the world organized that every one of us, in our place and time, is in balance with everything else.
Order is not pressure which is imposed on society from without, but an equilibrium which is set up from within.
I've learned that you can't have everything and do everything at the same time.
A bank is a place that will lend you money if you can prove that you don't need it.
Drive-in banks were established so most of the cars today could see their real owners.
A banker is a fellow who lends you his umbrella when the sun is shining, but wants it back the minute it begins to rain.
I don't have a bank account, because I don't know my mother's maiden name.
I believe that banking institutions are more dangerous to our liberties than standing armies. If the American people ever allow private banks to control the issue of their currency, first by inflation, then by deflation, the banks and corporations that will grow up around [the banks] will deprive the people of all property until their children wake-up homeless on the continent their fathers conquered. The issuing power should be taken from the banks and restored to the people, to whom it properly belongs.
What has a man's face to do with his character? Can a man of good character help having a disagreeable face?
Think of all the beauty still left around you and be happy.
Like anyone else, there are days I feel beautiful and days I don't, and when I don't, I do something about it.
Beautiful young people are accidents of nature, but beautiful old people are works of art.
What you look like on the outside is not what makes you cool at all. I mean, I had a mullet and wore parachute pants for a long, long time, and I'm doin' okay.
The absence of flaw in beauty is itself a flaw.
The words that enlighten the soul are more precious than jewels.
Develop interest in life as you see it; in people, things, literature, music - the world is so rich, simply throbbing with rich treasures, beautiful souls and interesting people. Forget yourself.
An agreeable manner may set off handsome features, but can never alter plain ones.
I'm tired of all this nonsense about beauty being only skin-deep. That's deep enough. What do you want, an adorable pancreas?
I am in control of all decisions that have to do with my image, which means that no one will decide what’s right for me except me. I’m not special. We should all feel this way about ourselves.
It can be a real struggle to accept that sometimes appearance can be more important than talent or intelligence.
No matter how big the glam squad, or how dramatic the dress, sometimes things just don’t work out.
So many people miss out on true talent because they can’t get past a look. At the end of the day, losing weight was easy, but finding talent? Now that’s hard.
The first question I ask myself when something doesn't seem to be beautiful is why do I think it's not beautiful. And very shortly you discover that there is no reason.
I never saw an ugly thing in my life: for let the form of an object be what it may - light, shade, and perspective will always make it beautiful.
I look foreword to an America which will not be afraid of grace and beauty.
I love pretty things; and I hate to look in the glass and see something that isn't pretty. It makes me feel so sorrowful—just as I feel when I look at any ugly thing. I pity it because it isn't beautiful.
One can dream so much better in a room where there are pretty things.
A fine dress on a homely maiden is never enough of a distraction. It can convey a sense of wealth and its accompanying attractions, but it can never truly compensate for a plain face.
Beauty and seduction is nature's tool for survival, because we will protect what we love.
Whatever is in any way beautiful hath its source of beauty in itself, and is complete in itself; praise forms no part of it. So it is none the worse nor the better for being praised.
Just because you are blind, and unable to see my beauty doesn't mean it does not exist.
Thankfully, beauty is easier to remove than apply, and a swipe of demaquillage in the right direction and you are you once again.
Ugly. Is irrelevant. It is an immeasurable insult to a woman, and then supposedly the worst crime you can commit as a woman. But ugly, as beautiful, is an illusion.
Somebody once said that beauty is the passport to success, but it's not a passport. It's a visa and it expires.
Order is the shape upon which beauty depends.
Rarely do great beauty and great virtue dwell together.
When I'm working on a problem, I never think about beauty. I think only how to solve the problem. But when I have finished, if the solution is not beautiful, I know it is wrong.
The ability to see beauty is the beginning of our moral sensibility. What we believe is beautiful we will not wantonly destroy.
What counts now is not just what we are against, but what we are for. Who leads us is less important than what leads us-what convictions, what courage, what faith-win or lose. A man doesn't save a century, or a civilization, but a militant party wedded to a principal can.
Man is what he believes.
I would never die for my beliefs because I might be wrong.
The public will believe anything, so long as it is not founded on truth.
The thing always happens that you really believe in; and the belief in a thing makes it happen.
With most men, unbelief in one thing springs from blind belief in another.
The fact that a believer is happier than a skeptic is no more to the point than the fact that a drunken man is happier than a sober one.
I would rather have a mind opened by wonder than one closed by belief.
In the province of the mind, what one believes to be true either is true or becomes true.
Men willingly believe what they wish.
Oh, what a tangled web we weave when first we practice to believe.
I never cease being dumbfounded by the unbelievable things people believe.
Sometimes I've believed as many as six impossible things before breakfast.
They were so strong in their beliefs that there came a time when it hardly mattered what exactly those beliefs were; they all fused into a single stubbornness.
Remember that what you believe will depend very much on what you are.
I can believe anything, provided that it is quite incredible.
Some things have to be believed to be seen.
Unless you believe, you will not understand.
Every man prefers belief to the exercise of judgement.
Though a good deal is too strange to be believed, nothing is too strange to have happened.
Believe one who has proved it. Believe an expert.
They can conquer who believe they can.
Those who can make you believe absurdities can make you commit atrocities.
It is not only fine feathers that make fine birds.
One swallow does not make a summer.
How helpless we are, like netted birds, when we are caught by desire!
I realized that If I had to choose, I would rather have birds than airplanes.
A bird does not sing because it has an answer. It sings because it has a song.
Fall is my favorite season in Los Angeles, watching the birds change color and fall from the trees.
I hope you love birds too. It is economical. It saves going to heaven.
The moment a little boy is concerned with which is a jay and which is a sparrow, he can no longer see the birds or hear them sing.
I once had a sparrow alight upon my shoulder for a moment, while I was hoeing in a village garden, and I felt that I was more distinguished by that circumstance that I should have been by any epaulet I could have worn.
Use what talents you possess: the woods would be very silent if no birds sang there except those that sang best.
Those little nimble musicians of the air, that warble forth their curious ditties, with which nature hath furnished them to the shame of art.
God loved the birds and invented trees. Man loved the birds and invented cages.
The very idea of a bird is a symbol and a suggestion to the poet. A bird seems to be at the top of the scale, so vehement and intense his life. . . . The beautiful vagabonds, endowed with every grace, masters of all climes, and knowing no bounds -- how many human aspirations are realised in their free, holiday-lives -- and how many suggestions to the poet in their flight and song!
I value my garden more for being full of blackbirds than of cherries, and very frankly give them fruit for their songs.
I know why the caged bird sings.
Cranes carry this heavy mystical baggage. They're icons of fidelity and happiness. The Vietnamese believe cranes cart our souls up to heaven on our wings.
Our avian brothers are back to roost on the first leg of their annual sojourn south. Why them and not us? Maybe it's because we humans are meant to be rooted in one spot.
There'll be bluebirds over the white cliffs of Dover,Tomorrow, just you wait and see.
There is nothing in which the birds differ more from man than the way in which they can build and yet leave a landscape as it was before.
Birds sing after a storm; why shouldn't people feel as free to delight in whatever sunlight remains to them?
Much talking is the cause of danger. Silence is the means of avoiding misfortune. The talkative parrot is shut up in a cage. Other birds, without speech, fly freely about.
I know of only one bird - the parrot - that talks; and it can't fly very high.
No bird soars too high if he soars with his own wings.
When thou seest an eagle, thou seest a portion of genius; lift up thy head!
You cannot fly like an eagle with the wings of a wren.
It is true that I was born in Iowa, but I can't speak for my twin sister.
Some people are born on third base and go through life thinking they hit a triple.
He not busy being born is busy dying.
There is no cure for birth and death save to enjoy the interval.
When I was born I was so surprised I didn't talk for a year and a half.
We are born charming, fresh and spontaneous and must be civilized before we are fit to participate in society.
Somewhere on this globe, every ten seconds, there is a woman giving birth to a child. She must be found and stopped.
To my embarrassment I was born in bed with a lady.
All we actually have is our body and its muscles that allow us to be under our own power.
Oh, darling, let your body in, let it tie you in, in comfort.
Be sure that it is not you that is mortal, but only your body. For that man whom your outward form reveals is not yourself; the spirit is the true self, not that physical figure which and be pointed out by your finger.
Safeguard the health both of body and soul.
But the body is deeper than the soul and its secrets inscrutable.
I live in company with a body, a silent companion, exacting and eternal.
Of one thing I am certain, the body is not the measure of healing - peace is the measure.
The body is an instrument, the mind its function, the witness and reward of its operation.
The mind's first step to self-awareness must be through the body.
Each individual woman's body demands to be accepted on its own terms.
Each body has its art...
Every man is the builder of a temple called his body.
I stand in awe of my body.
Our own physical body possesses a wisdom which we who inhabit the body lack.
A sound mind in a sound body is a short but full description of a happy state in this world.
A healthy mind in a healthy body.
You should pray for a sound mind in a sound body.
He who loves the world as his body may be entrusted with the empire.
Over the years your bodies become walking autobiographies, telling friends and strangers alike of the minor and major stresses of your lives.
The body is a sacred garment.
The body is shaped, disciplined, honored, and in time, trusted.
The body says what words cannot.
There is but one temple in the universe and that is the body of man.
I finally realized that being grateful to my body was key to giving more love to myself.
It is confidence in our bodies, minds and spirits that allows us to keep looking for new adventures, new directions to grow in, and new lessons to learn - which is what life is all about.
It's also helpful to realize that this very body that we have, that's sitting right here right now... with its aches and it pleasures... is exactly what we need to be fully human, fully awake, fully alive.
Bodily exercise, when compulsory, does no harm to the body; but knowledge which is acquired under compulsion obtains no hold on the mind.
Choose rather to be strong of soul than strong of body.
I am convinced that life in a physical body is meant to be an ecstatic experience.
Our bodies communicate to us clearly and specifically, if we are willing to listen to them.
Reading, after a certain age, diverts the mind too much from its creative pursuits. Any man who reads too much and uses his own brain too little falls into lazy habits of thinking.
This paperback is very interesting, but I find it will never replace a hardcover book - it makes a very poor doorstop.
The covers of this book are too far apart.
In literature as in love, we are astonished at what is chosen by others.
You can cover a great deal of country in books.
There's a certain kind of conversation you have from time to time at parties in New York about a new book. The word "banal" sometimes rears its by-now banal head; you say "underedited," I say "derivative." The conversation goes around and around various literary criticisms, and by the time it moves on one thing is clear: No one read the book; we just read the reviews.
Books to the ceiling, Books to the sky, My pile of books is a mile high. How I love them! How I need them! I'll have a long beard by the time I read them.
Wear the old coat and buy the new book.
Life-transforming ideas have always come to me through books.
Many books require no thought from those who read them, and for a very simple reason; they made no such demand upon those who wrote them.
I've never known any trouble that an hour's reading didn't assuage.
Books are the quietest and most constant of friends; they are the most accessible and wisest of counsellors, and the most patient of teachers.
There is no mistaking a real book when one meets it. It is like falling in love.
A room without books is like a body without a soul.
It was a book to kill time for those who like it better dead.
Nothing can do what a book can do. Lifts you out of your life... to a whole new world, whole new perspective. A book is like a dream you're borrowing from a friend.
Books...are like lobster shells, we surround ourselves with 'em, then we grow out of 'em and leave 'em behind, as evidence of our earlier stages of development.
This is not a novel to be tossed aside lightly. It should be thrown with great force.
Don't join the book burners. Don't think you're going to conceal faults by concealing evidence that they ever existed. Don't be afraid to go in your library and read every book...
My personal hobbies are reading, listening to music, and silence.
All good books are alike in that they are truer than if they had really happened and after you are finished reading one you will feel that all that happened to you and afterwards it all belongs to you; the good and the bad, the ecstasy, the remorse and sorrow, the people and the places and how the weather was.
Most new books are forgotten within a year, especially by those who borrow them.
Properly, we should read for power. Man reading should be man intensely alive. The book should be a ball of light in one's hand.
I think it is good that books still exist, but they do make me sleepy.
A good novel tells us the truth about its hero; but a bad novel tells us the truth about its author.
There is a great deal of difference between an eager man who wants to read a book and the tired man who wants a book to read.
Woe be to him that reads but one book.
From the moment I picked up your book until I laid it down, I was convulsed with laughter. Some day I intend reading it.
I find television very educating. Every time somebody turns on the set, I go into the other room and read a book.
Bore, n.: A person who talks when you wish him to listen.
A finished person is a boring person.
A bore is a man who, when you ask him how he is, tells you.
All God does is watch us and kill us when we get boring. We must never, ever be boring.
The cure for boredom is curiosity. There is no cure for curiosity.
Someone's boring me. I think it's me.
Every improvement in communication makes the bore more terrible.
Good-bye. I am leaving because I am bored.
A bore is a man who deprives you of solitude without providing you with company.
The capacity of human beings to bore one another seems to be vastly greater than that of any other animal.
The nice thing about being a celebrity is that when you bore people, they think it's their fault.
A healthy male adult bore consumes each year one and a half times his own weight in other people's patience.
The penalty for success is to be bored by the people who used to snub you.
Every hero becomes a bore at last.
The secret of being a bore is to tell everything.
The secret of being boring is to say everything.
Life is as tedious as a twice-told tale Vexing the dull ear of a drowsy man.
[S]he refused to be bored chiefly because she wasn’t boring.
What a splendid head, yet no brain.
Thinking rationally is often different from "positive thinking," in that it is a realistic assessment of the situation, with a view towards rectifying the problem if possible.
Brain: an apparatus with which we think we think.
If there is anything in the world that can really be called a man's property, it is surely that which is the result of his mental activity.
Exercising self-restraint can be depleting, yet it can also be ennobling.
It's essential to tailor rehab to what impassions someone. The brain gradually learns by riveting its attention-through endless repetitions.
The human brain starts working the moment you are born and never stops until you stand up to speak in public.
Estimated amount of glucose used by an adult human brain each day, expressed in M&Ms: 250
The brain is a wonderful organ. It starts working the moment you get up in the morning and does not stop until you get into the office.
The human brain is a most unusual instrument of elegant and as yet unknown capacity.
If little else, the brain is an educational toy.
Aristotle was famous for knowing everything. He taught that the brain exists merely to cool the blood and is not involved in the process of thinking. This is true only of certain persons.
The perfect bureaucrat everywhere is the man who manages to make no decisions and escape all responsibility.
Bureaucrats write memoranda both because they appear to be busy when they are writing and because the memos, once written, immediately become proof that they were busy.
The only thing that saves us from the bureaucracy is inefficiency. An efficient bureaucracy is the greatest threat to liberty.
Bureaucracy defends the status quo long past the time when the quo has lost its status.
Hell hath no fury like a bureaucrat scorned.
The best way to compile inaccurate information that no one wants is to make it up.
Any sufficiently advanced bureaucracy is indistinguishable from molasses.
Talk of nothing but business, and dispatch that business quickly.
The gambling known as business looks with austere disfavor upon the business known as gambling.
Drive thy business or it will drive thee.
The chief business of the American people is business.
There is one person in charge of every office in America and that person is Charles Darwin.
There's no business like show business, but there are several businesses like accounting.
In the modern world of business, it is useless to be a creative original thinker unless you can also sell what you create. Management cannot be expected to recognize a good idea unless it is presented to them by a good salesman.
Success in business requires training and discipline and hard work. But if you're not frightened by these things, the opportunities are just as great today as they ever were.
Here’s my theory about meetings and life; the three things you can’t fake are erections, competence and creativity. That’s why meetings become toxic they put uncreative people in a situation in which they have to be something they can never be. And the more effort they put into concealing their inabilities, the more toxic the meeting becomes. One of the most common creativity-faking tactics is when someone puts their hands in prayer position and conceals their mouth while they nod at you and say, 'Mmmmmm. Interesting.' If pressed, they’ll add, 'I’ll have to get back to you on that.' Then they don’t say anything else.
Charge less, but charge. Otherwise, you will not be taken seriously, and you do your fellow artists no favours if you undercut the market.
'Whom are you?' he asked, for he had attended business college.
Good design can't fix broken business models.
I find it rather easy to portray a businessman. Being bland, rather cruel and incompetent comes naturally to me.
You never really hear the truth from your subordinates until after 10 in the evening.
In business, you must remain unattached to the outcome. It matters not who is chosen first and who is chosen second. The only thing that matters is the final verdict.
The more I know about business, the more I'm convinced that it is conducted in homes and churches far more than in office buildings.
A dinner lubricates business.
To succeed as a team is to hold all of the members accountable for their expertise.
My own business always bores me to death; I prefer other people's.
Business has only two basic functions-marketing and innovation.
Letting your customers set your standards is a dangerous game, because the race to the bottom is pretty easy to win. Setting your own standards--and living up to them--is a better way to profit. Not to mention a better way to make your day worth all the effort you put into it.
I ran the wrong kind of business, but I did it with integrity.
Designing your product for monetization first, and people second will probably leave you with neither.
No one travelling on a business trip would be missed if he failed to arrive.
In the business world, the rearview mirror is always clearer than the windshield.
In all things of nature there is something of the marvelous.
He maketh me to lie down in green pastures he leadeth me beside the still waters.
A lot of people like snow. I find it to be an unnecessary freezing of water.
Hunting has opened the earth to me and let me sense the rhythms and hierarchies of nature.
Real freedom lies in wildness, not in civilization.
Camping is nature's way of promoting the motel business.
There is... nothing greater than touching the shore after crossing some great body of water knowing that I've done it with my own two arms and legs.
I would feel more optimistic about a bright future for man if he spent less time proving that he can outwit Nature and more time tasting her sweetness and respecting her seniority.
Mountains inspire awe in any human person who has a soul. They remind us of our frailty, our unimportance, of the briefness of our span upon this earth. They touch the heavens, and sail serenely at an altitude beyond even the imaginings of a mere mortal.
Kneeling over a trickling mountain stream and pumping every ounce of water you use though a filter can really change your perception of turning on a faucet.
There is a solitude, or perhaps a solemnity, in the few hours that precede the dawn of day which is unlike that of any others in the twenty-four, and which I cannot explain or account for. Thoughts come to me at this time that I never have at any other.
Some national parks have long waiting lists for camping reservations. When you have to wait a year to sleep next to a tree, something is wrong.
In wildness is the preservation of the world.
It is pleasant to have been to a place the way a river went.
It was the Law of the Sea, they said. Civilization ends at the waterline. Beyond that, we all enter the food chain, and not always right at the top.
What nature delivers to us is never stale. Because what nature creates has eternity in it.
Those little nimble musicians of the air, that warble forth their curious ditties, with which nature hath furnished them to the shame of art.
People say to me so often, 'Jane how can you be so peaceful when everywhere around you people want books signed, people are asking these questions and yet you seem peaceful,' and I always answer that it is the peace of the forest that I carry inside.
Climb the mountains and get their good tidings. Nature's peace will flow into you as sunshine flows into trees. The winds will blow their own freshness into you, and the storms their energy, while cares will drop away from you like the leaves of Autumn.
Come to the woods, for here is rest. There is no repose like that of the green deep woods. Here grow the wallflower and the violet. The squirrel will come and sit upon your knee, the logcock will wake you in the morning. Sleep in forgetfulness of all ill. Of all the upness accessible to mortals, there is no upness comparable to the mountains.
Everybody needs beauty as well as bread, places to play in and pray in, where nature may heal and give strength to body and soul alike.
Fresh beauty opens one's eyes wherever it is really seen, but the very abundance and completeness of the common beauty that besets our steps prevents its being absorbed and appreciated. It is a good thing, therefore, to make short excursions now and then to the bottom of the sea among dulse and coral, or up among the clouds on mountain-tops, or in balloons, or even to creep like worms into dark holes and caverns underground, not only to learn something of what is going on in those out-of-the-way places, but to see better what the sun sees on our return to common everyday beauty.
In God's wildness lies the hope of the world - the great fresh unblighted, unredeemed wilderness. The galling harness of civilization drops off, and wounds heal ere we are aware.
Keep close to Nature's heart... and break clear away, once in awhile, and climb a mountain or spend a week in the woods. Wash your spirit clean. None of Nature's landscapes are ugly so long as they are wild.
The clearest way into the Universe is through a forest wilderness.
When we contemplate the whole globe as one great dewdrop, striped and dotted with continents and islands, flying through space with other stars all singing and shining together as one, the whole universe appears as an infinite storm of beauty.
When we try to pick out anything by itself, we find it hitched to everything else in the Universe.
When one loses the deep intimate relationship with nature, then temples, mosques and churches become important.
Nature has been for me, for as long as I remember, a source of solace, inspiration, adventure, and delight; a home, a teacher, a companion.
Water, taken in moderation, cannot hurt anybody.
When Solomon said there was a time and a place for everything he had not encountered the problem of parking his automobile.
Life is too short for traffic.
Americans will put up with anything provided it doesn't block traffic.
Traffic signals in New York are just rough guidelines.
If all the cars in the United States were placed end to end, it would probably be Labor Day Weekend.
The best car safety device is a rear-view mirror with a cop in it.
Drive-in banks were established so most of the cars today could see their real owners.
Normal is getting dressed in clothes that you buy for work and driving through traffic in a car that you are still paying for - in order to get to the job you need to pay for the clothes and the car, and the house you leave vacant all day so you can afford to live in it.
It takes hundreds of nuts to hold a car together, but it takes only one of them to scatter it all over the highway.
I know a lot about cars. I can look at a car's headlights and tell you exactly which way it's coming.
If the automobile had followed the same development cycle as the computer, a Rolls-Royce would today cost $100, get a million miles per gallon, and explode once a year, killing everyone inside.
Is fuel efficiency really what we need most desperately? I say that what we really need is a car that can be shot when it breaks down.
I hate the outdoors. To me the outdoors is where the car is.
If a dog jumps in your lap, it is because he is fond of you; but if a cat does the same thing, it is because your lap is warmer.
It's funny how dogs and cats know the inside of folks better than other folks do, isn't it?
I honestly don't know how you live without having a cat inside your house. It's like having a little living piece of art that is also very warm and soft.
Cats and monkeys; monkeys and cats; all human life is there.
Cats regard people as warmblooded furniture.
Cats are smarter than dogs. You can't get eight cats to pull a sled through snow.
Nature abhors a vacuum, but not as much as cats do.
Of all God's creatures there is only one that cannot be made the slave of the lash. That one is the cat. If man could be crossed with cat it would improve man, but it would deteriorate the cat.
I like pigs. Dogs look up to us. Cats look down on us. Pigs treat us as equals.
"I meant," said Ipslore bitterly, "what is there in this world that truly makes living worthwhile?" Death thought about it. "Cats," he said eventually. "Cats are nice."
Cats are intended to teach us that not everything in nature has a function.
A sign of celebrity is that his name is often worth more than his services.
A celebrity is a person who works hard all his life to become well known, then wears dark glasses to avoid being recognized.
A celebrity is one who is known to many persons he is glad he doesn't know.
The nice thing about being a celebrity is that when you bore people, they think it's their fault.
Living in L.A., everyone likes to mold you and change you. I don't care about fame, I don't care about being a celebrity. I know that's part of the job, but I don't feed into anyone's idea of who I should be.
I had an epiphany a few years ago where I was out at a celebrity party and it suddenly dawned on me that I had yet to meet a celebrity who is as smart and interesting as any of my friends.
When once a man has made celebrity necessary to his happiness, he has put it in the power of the weakest and most timorous malignity, if not to take away his satisfaction, at least to withhold it. His enemies may indulge their pride by airy negligence and gratify their malice by quiet neutrality.
Men are not prisoners of fate, but only prisoners of their own minds.
It's choice - not chance - that determines your destiny.
Fortune can, for her pleasure, fools advance,  And toss them on the wheels of Chance.
The moments that we have with friends and family, the chances that we have to make a big difference in the world or even to make a small difference to the ones we love, all those wonderful chances that life gives us, life also takes away. It can happen fast and a whole lot sooner than you think.
In the field of observation, chance favors only the prepared mind. 
Chance is always powerful. Let your hook be always cast; in the pool where you least expect it, there will be a fish.
Work and acquire, and thou hast chained the wheel of Chance.
The sufferings that fate inflicts on us should be borne with patience, what enemies inflict with manly courage.
Destiny is no matter of chance. It is a matter of choice. It is not a thing to be waited for, it is a thing to be achieved.
They always say time changes things, but you actually have to change them yourself.
Only I can change my life. No one can do it for me.
Change is the constant, the signal for rebirth, the egg of the phoenix.
The only sense that is common in the long run, is the sense of change-and we all instinctively avoid it.
This isn't good or bad. It's just the way of things. Nothing stays the same.
He who rejects change is the architect of decay. The only human institution which rejects progress is the cemetery.
We all have big changes in our lives that are more or less a second chance.
Things do not change; we change.
Nothing endures but change.
It's not that some people have willpower and some don't. It's that some people are ready to change and others are not.
Just as I had to go through a transition period, I guess [my friends and family] did, too.
Most people see themselves a certain way their entire lives. When they go through a massive change, such as losing weight, they have to learn to see themselves in a new way. It is one of the biggest struggles her members deal with on their journey.
People get comfortable with the way you are—they have formed their opinion of you based on everything they see and know about you as a person. When you change that up by losing weight, they no longer understand you.
The only way you can sustain a permanent change is to create a new way of thinking, acting, and being.
When other people reject positive changes you make for yourself, there is always some nerve to get to the root of in those other people.
Change has a considerable psychological impact on the human mind. To the fearful it is threatening because it means that things may get worse. To the hopeful it is encouraging because things may get better. To the confident it is inspiring because the challenge exists to make things better.
We did not change as we grew older; we just became more clearly ourselves.
The universe is change; our life is what our thoughts make it.
Any transition serious enough to alter your definition of self will require not just small adjustments in your way of living and thinking but a full-on metamorphosis.
This is your time and it feels normal to you, but really, there is no normal. There's only change and resistance to it and then more change.
The more things change, the more they remain... insane.
There is nothing like returning to a place that remains unchanged to find the ways in which you yourself have altered.
Change your thoughts and you change your world.
Turbulence is life force. It is opportunity. Let's love turbulence and use it for change.
Few will have the greatness to bend history itself; but each of us can work to change a small portion of events, and in the total of all those acts will be written the history of this generation.
Progress is a nice word. But change is its motivator and change has its enemies.
If you want change, you have to make it. If we want progress we have to drive it.
Nothing in the world is permanent, and we're foolish when we ask anything to last, but surely we're still more foolish not to take delight in it while we have it. If change is of the essence of existence one would have thought it only sensible to make it the premise of our philosophy.
Character is like a tree and reputation like its shadow. The shadow is what we think of it; the tree is the real thing.
Nearly all men can stand adversity, but if you want to test a man's character, give him power.
Everyone has the obligation to ponder well his own specific traits of character. He must also regulate them adequately and not wonder whether someone else's traits might suit him better. The more definitely his own a man's character is, the better it fits him.
Without an acquaintance with the rules of propriety, it is impossible for the character to be established.
Many a man's reputation would not know his character if they met on the street.
People grow through experience if they meet life honestly and courageously. This is how character is built.
Forming characters! Whose? Our own or others? Both. And in that momentous fact lies the peril and responsibility of our existence.
Personality can open doors, but only character can keep them open.
I am a man of fixed and unbending principles, the first of which is to flexible at all times.
In attempts to improve your character, know what is in your power and what is beyond it.
A person reveals his character by nothing so clearly as the joke he resents.
Our character...is an omen of our destiny, and the more integrity we have and keep, the simpler and nobler that destiny is likely to be.
Character cannot be developed in ease and quiet. Only through experience of trial and suffering can the soul be strengthened, ambition inspired, and success achieved.
Of all the properties which belong to honorable men, not one is so highly prized as that of character.
A man's character is his fate.
People with courage and character always seem sinister to the rest.
The farther behind I leave the past, the closer I am to forging my own character.
You cannot dream yourself into a character; you must hammer and forge yourself one.
How easy it is for generous sentiments, high courtesy, and chivalrous courage to lose their influence beneath the chilling blight of selfishness, and to exhibit to the world a man who was great in all the minor attributes of character, but who was found wanting when it became necessary to prove how much principle is superior to policy.
Character consists of what you do on the third and forth tries.
When the character of a man is not clear to you, look at his friends.
Character - the willingness to accept responsibility for one's own life - is the source from which self respect springs.
Men show their characters in nothing more clearly than in what they think laughable.
I take it as a man's duty to restrain himself.
One can acquire everything in solitude - except character.
To succeed is nothing, it's an accident. but to feel no doubts about oneself is something very different: it is character.
The character of a man is known from his conversations.
I could never think well of a man's intellectual or moral character, if he was habitually unfaithful to his appointments.
The character of every act depends upon the circumstances in which it is done.
Too many have dispensed with generosity in order to practice charity.
One of the serious obstacles to the improvement of our race is indiscriminate charity.
Like threads of silver seen through crystal beadsLet love through good deeds show.
The best thing to give to your enemy is forgiveness; to an opponent, tolerance; to a friend, your heart; to your child, a good example; to a father, deference; to your mother, conduct that will make her proud of you; to yourself, respect; to all men, charity.
The living need charity more than the dead.
Charity sees the need not the cause.
A bone to the dog is not charity. Charity is the bone shared with the dog, when you are just as hungry as the dog.
In charity there is no excess.
Be charitable before wealth makes thee covetous.
Charity begins at home.
The charity that hastens to proclaim its good deeds, ceases to be charity, and is only pride and ostentation.
Charm is a way of getting the answer yes without asking a clear question.
You know what charm is: a way of getting the answer yes without having asked any clear question.
All charming people have something to conceal, usually their total dependence on the appreciation of others.
Charm is the quality in others that makes us more satisfied with ourselves.
We are born charming, fresh and spontaneous and must be civilized before we are fit to participate in society.
It is absurd to divide people into good and bad. People are either charming or tedious.
There was a time when we expected nothing of our children but obedience, as opposed to the present, when we expect everything of them but obedience.
I would be the most content if my children grew up to be the kind of people who think decorating consists mostly of building enough bookshelves.
Grown-ups never understand anything for themselves, and it is tiresome for children to be always and forever explaining things to them.
Human beings are the only creatures that allow their children to come back home.
People who get nostalgic about childhood were obviously never children.
If you can give your son or daughter only one gift, let it be enthusiasm.
To be ignorant of what occurred before you were born is to remain always a child.
The first half of our lives is ruined by our parents, and the second half by our children.
One of the common causes of serious difficulty takes the form of parental self-discovery. The newly adopted child brings out submerged feelings or behavior in his parents that make them dislike themselves. This can be such a severe blow to their self- esteem that they must eradicate the cause of their distress. Sometimes the only way that parents are able to do that is by returning the child.
The best way to learn to be an honest, responsible adult is to live with adults who act honestly and responsibly.
Facing a mirror you see merely your own countenance; facing your child you finally understand how everyone else has seen you.
If your parents never had children, chances are you won't, either.
The test of the morality of a society is what it does for its children.
The best way to keep children home is to make the home atmosphere pleasant--and let the air out of the tires.
Having a baby's sweet face so close to your own, for so long a time as it takes to nurse 'em, is a great tonic for a sad soul.
We do our children no favour by keeping them near, coddling them, or showing them off to adult visitors. Not that a nursemaid does not sometimes spoil them. But the greatest favour we can do our children is to give visible example of love and esteem to our spouse. As they grow up, they may then look forward to maturity so they too can find such love.
Ask your child what he wants for dinner only if he's buying.
I must take issue with the term 'a mere child,' for it has been my invariable experience that the company of a mere child is infinitely preferable to that of a mere adult.
Never have children, only grandchildren.
That's the funny thing about havin' a kid. They come with their own set of problems; make everything else you were worried about seem kinda silly.
Babies are cool, until you've done everything to do with 'em and you get bored. That's why T.V. shows about babies don't last more than a year.
A child of five would understand this. Send someone to fetch a child of five.
My mother loved children -- she would have given anything if I had been one.
I have found the best way to give advice to your children is to find out what they want and then advise them to do it.
It is not giving children more that spoils them; it is giving them more to avoid confrontation.
That's the great thing about being in the third grade. If you've got one polysyllabic adjective, everyone thinks you're a genius.
You know that children are growing up when they start asking questions that have answers.
I am amused when goody-goodies proclaim, from the safety of their armchairs, that children are naturally prejudice-free, that they only learn to "hate" from listening to bigoted adults. Nonsense. Tolerance is a learned trait, like riding a bike or playing the piano. Those of us who actually live among children, who see them in their natural environment, know the truth: Left to their own devices, children will gang up on and abuse anyone who is even slightly different from the norm.
Allowing children to fight their own battles is one of the hardest parenting skills to learn.
Children should feel loved because they exist, not because they’ve behaved in a certain way.
I never believed in Santa Claus because I knew no white dude would come into my neighborhood after dark.
A turkey never voted for an early Christmas.
I don't like green Christmases. They're not green—they're just nasty faded browns and grays.
Do give books - religious or otherwise - for Christmas. They're never fattening, seldom sinful, and permanently personal.
Aren't we forgeting the true meaning of Christmas? You know, the birth of Santa.
Christmas is a time when people of all religions come together to worship Jesus Christ.
I stopped believing in Santa Claus when my mother took me to see him in a department store, and he asked for my autograph.
At Christmas play and make good cheer, For Christmas comes but once a year. 
Civilization advances by extending the number of important operations which we can perform without thinking of them.
Civilization degrades the many to exalt the few.
When several villages are united in a single complete community, large enough to nearly or quite self-sufficing, the state comes into existence, originating in the bare needs of life, and continuing in existence for the sake of a good life.
Underlying the whole scheme of civilization is the confidence men have in each other, confidence in their integrity, confidence in their honesty, confidence in their future.
The country only has charms for those not obliged to stay there.
The history of man is a graveyard of great cultures that came to catastrophic ends because of their incapacity for planned, rational, voluntary reaction to challenge.
We must remember that any oppression, any injustice, any hatred, is a wedge designed to attack our civilization.
Civilization is a race between education and catastrophe.
The more rapidly a civilization progresses, the sooner it dies for another to rise in its place.
It is better for civilization to be going down the drain than to be coming up it.
But the greatest menace to our civilization today is the conflict between giant organized systems of self-righteousness-each system only too delighted to find that the other is wicked-each only too glad that the sins give it the pretext for still deeper hatred and animosity.
Civilization is a method of living, an attitude of equal respect for all men.
Civilization is the art of living in towns of such size the everyone does not know everyone else.
Civilization is built on a number of ultimate principles...respect for human life, the punishment of crimes against property and persons, the equality of all good citizens before the law...or, in a word justice.
America is the only country that went from barbarism to decadence without civilization in between.
The end of the human race will be that it will eventually die of civilization.
The true civilization is where every man gives to every other every right that he claims for himself.
Speech is civilization itself... It is silence which isolates.
Civilization begins with order, grows with liberty, and dies with chaos.
You can't say that civilization don't advance, however, for in every war they kill you in a new way.
One of the indictments of civilizations is that happiness and intelligence are so rarely found in the same person.
The computing field is always in need of new cliches.
Let's have some new cliches.
Any great truth can -- and eventually will -- be expressed as a cliche -- a cliche is a sure and certain way to dilute an idea. For instance, my grandmother used to say, 'The black cat is always the last one off the fence.' I have no idea what she meant, but at one time, it was undoubtedly true.
If computers get too powerful, we can organize them into a committee -- that will do them in.
A committee can make a decision that is dumber than any of its members.
Not even computers will replace committees, because committees buy computers.
Committee--a group of men who individually can do nothing but as a group decide that nothing can be done.
There is no monument dedicated to the memory of a committee.
To get something done, a committee should consist of no more than three men, two of whom are absent.
A committee is a cul-de-sac down which ideas are lured and then quietly strangled.
Common sense is the collection of prejudices acquired by age eighteen.
Stupid is forever, ignorance can be fixed.
The last time anybody made a list of the top hundred character attributes of New Yorkers, common sense snuck in at number 79.
Everybody gets so much information all day long that they lose their common sense.
[Common sense] is the best sense I know of.
The freethinking of one age is the common sense of the next.
Nowadays most people die of a sort of creeping common sense, and discover when it is too late that the only things one never regrets are one's mistakes.
Nothing astonishes men so much as common sense and plain dealing.
If an idea's worth having once, it's worth having twice.
Good communication is as stimulating as black coffee and just as hard to sleep after.
Every improvement in communication makes the bore more terrible.
The constant free flow of communication amount us-enabling the free interchange of ideas-forms the very bloodstream of our nation. It keeps the mind and body of our democracy eternally vital, eternally young.
Let us make a special effort to stop communicating with each other, so we can have some conversation.
Sending important messages via text is the coward’s way out. Don’t be the person who texts important messages. It’s rude, inconsiderate, and, yes, cowardly.
Communication is something so simple and difficult that we can never put it in simple words.
I wish people who have trouble communicating would just shut up.
Think like a wise man but communicate in the language of the people.
Communism doesn't work because people like to own stuff.
Under capitalism, man exploits man. Under communism, it's just the opposite.
Communism is like one big phone company.
Communism is like prohibition, it's a good idea but it won't work.
The best political community is formed by citizens of the middle class.
Isn't everyone a part of everyone else?
First it is necessary to stand on your own two feet. But the minute a man finds himself in that position, the next thing he should do is reach out his arms.
Never doubt that a small group of thoughtful, committed citizens can change the world. Indeed, it is the only thing that ever has.
The universal brotherhood of man is our most precious possession.
But the life that no longer trust another human being and no longer forms ties to the political community is not a human life any longer.
God creates men, but they choose each other.
Incompetents invariably make trouble for people other than themselves.
Competence, like truth, beauty and contact lenses, is in the eye of the beholder.
Equal opportunity means everyone will have a fair chance at being incompetent.
Everyone rises to their level of incompetence.
The incompetent with nothing to do can still make a mess of it.
The computing field is always in need of new cliches.
Computers make it easier to do a lot of things, but most of the things they make it easier to do don't need to be done.
The great thing about a computer notebook is that no matter how much you stuff into it, it doesn't get bigger or heavier.
If computers get too powerful, we can organize them into a committee -- that will do them in.
Why is it drug addicts and computer afficionados are both called users?
My computer beat me at chess... so I beat it at kickboxing.
Home computers are being called upon to perform many new functions, including the consumption of homework formerly eaten by the dog.
Computer Science is no more about computers than astronomy is about telescopes.
The question of whether a computer can think is no more interesting than the question of whether a submarine can swim.
Not even computers will replace committees, because committees buy computers.
To err is human, but to really foul things up requires a computer.
Compromise used to mean that half a loaf was better than no bread. Among modern statesmen it really seems to mean that half a loaf is better than a whole loaf.
Most people believe that if you go in and try to micromanage a forest, it is possible to destroy the very thing that makes it a unique and special place. That's just as true of the Net.
I do not fear computers. I fear the lack of them.
Part of the inhumanity of the computer is that, once it is competently programmed and working smoothly, it is completely honest.
Computers can figure out all kinds of problems, except the things in the world that just don't add up.
Imagine if every Thursday your shoes exploded if you tied them the usual way. This happens to us all the time with computers, and nobody thinks of complaining.
The most overlooked advantage to owning a computer is that if they foul up there's no law against wacking them around a little.
One would think that if you're anonymous, you'd do anything you want, but groups have their own sense of community and what we can do.
In all large corporations, there is a pervasive fear that someone, somewhere is having fun with a computer on company time. Networks help alleviate that fear.
There is no reason for any individual to have a computer in his home.
No computer has ever been designed that is ever aware of what it's doing; but most of the time, we aren't either.
The most likely way for the world to be destroyed, most experts agree, is by accident. That's where we come in; we're computer professionals. We cause accidents.
Computers are useless. They can only give you answers.
The computer is a moron.
If you put tomfoolery into a computer, nothing comes out of it but tomfoolery. But this tomfoolery, having passed through a very expensive machine, is somehow ennobled and no-one dares criticize it.
Programming today is a race between software engineers striving to build bigger and better idiot-proof programs, and the Universe trying to produce bigger and better idiots. So far, the Universe is winning.
To err is human--and to blame it on a computer is even more so.
If the automobile had followed the same development cycle as the computer, a Rolls-Royce would today cost $100, get a million miles per gallon, and explode once a year, killing everyone inside.
I think computer viruses should count as life. I think it says something about human nature that the only form of life we have created so far is purely destructive. We've created life in our own image.
Self-conceit may lead to self-destruction.
The smaller the mind the greater the conceit.
When they discover the center of the universe, a lot of people will be disappointed to discover they are not it.
Conceit is God's gift to little men.
What is the first business of one who practices philosophy? To get rid of self-conceit. For it is impossible for anyone to begin to learn that which he thinks he already knows.
The world tolerates conceit from those who are successful, but not from anybody else.
An ostentatious man will rather relate a blunder or an absurdity he has committed, than be debarred from talking of his own dear person.
We are so vain that we even care for the opinion of those we don't care for.
For God hates utterlyThe bray of bragging tongues.
The greatest of faults, I should say, is to be conscious of none.
There are admirable potentialities in every human being. Believe in your strength and your youth. Learn to repeat endlessly to yourself, 'It all depends on me.'
I was always looking outside myself for strength and confidence, but it comes from within. It is there all the time.
Having once decided to achieve a certain task, achieve it at all costs of tedium and distaste. The gain in self-confidence of having accomplished a tiresome labor is immense.
Concentration comes out of a combination of confidence and hunger.
Attempt easy tasks as if they were difficult, and difficult as if they were easy; in the one case that confidence may not fall asleep, in the other that it may not be dismayed.
If I could give you just one gift ever for the rest of your life it would be this. Confidence. It would be the gift of confidence. Either that or a scented candle.
The man who has confidence in himself gains the confidence of others.
All you need in this life is ignorance and confidence; then success is sure.
Believe in yourself! Have faith in your abilities! Without a humble but reasonable confidence in your own powers you cannot be successful or happy
Often we don't even realize who we're meant to be because we're so busy trying to live out someone else's ideas. But other people and their opinions hold no power in defining our destiny.
Feeling special is the worst kind of cage a person can build for himself.
It seems to me that people have vast potential. Most people can do extraordinary things if they have the confidence or take the risks. Yet most people don't. They sit in front of the telly and treat life as if it goes on forever.
If I have lost confidence in myself, I have the universe against me.
You have to have confidence in your ability, and then be tough enough to follow through.
You can be confident and secure and know that you do a good job at what you do. But you don't know to be arrogant about it.
Self-confidence is the first requisite to great undertakings.
My intent is simply to know my material so well that I'm very comfortable with it. Confidence, not perfection, is the goal.
Every time you don't follow your inner guidance, you feel a loss of energy, loss of power, a sense of spiritual deadness.
Getting ahead in a difficult profession requires avid faith in yourself. That is why some people with mediocre talent, but with great inner drive, go much further than people with vastly superior talent.
You can't connect the dots looking forward you can only connect them looking backwards. So you have to trust that the dots will somehow connect in your future. You have to trust in something: your gut, destiny, life, karma, whatever. Because believing that the dots will connect down the road will give you the confidence to follow your heart, even when it leads you off the well worn path.
Confidence is 10% hard work and 90% delusion.
Oh, I don't blame Congress. If I had $600 billion at my disposal, I'd be irresponsible, too.
It could probably be shown by facts and figures that there is no distinctly American criminal class except Congress.
Suppose you were an idiot and suppose you were a member of Congress. But I repeat myself.
I don't mind what Congress does, as long as they don't do it in the streets and frighten the horses.
This country has come to feel the same when Congress is in session as when the baby gets hold of a hammer.
A clear conscience is a good pillow.
A conscience is what hurts when all your other parts feel so good.
A guilty conscience needs no accuser.
A good conscience is a continual Christmas.
If all the world hated you and believed you wicked, while your own conscience approved of you and absolved you from guilt, you would not be without friends.
A lot of people mistake a short memory for a clear conscience.
In the courtroom of the conscience, a case is always in progress.
Conscience is God's presence in man. 
There is one thing alonethat stands the brunt of life throughout its course:a quiet conscience.
Conscience is what makes a boy tell his mother before his sister does.
Fear is the tax that conscience pays to guilt.
Labor to keep alive in your breast that little spark of celestial fire called conscience.
Conscience is a mother-in-law whose visit never ends.
Conscience is the inner voice that warns us somebody may be looking.
Before I can live with other folks, I’ve got to live with myself. The one thing that doesn’t abide by majority rule is a person’s conscience.
The conscience of a people is their power.
All a man can betray is his conscience.
Conscience is the perfect interpreter of life.
I cannot and will not cut my conscience to fit this year's fashions.
Most people sell their souls, and live with a good conscience on the proceeds.
Freedom is a clear conscience.
Conscience is the voice of the soul.
There is no witness so dreadful, no accuser so terrible as the conscience that dwells in the heart of every man.
Courage without conscience is a wild beast.
Conscience and reputation are two things. Conscience is due to yourself, reputation to your neighbour.
Conscience is, in most men, an anticipation of the opinion of others.
It behoves every man who values liberty of conscience for himself, to resist invasions of it in the case of others; or their case may, by change of circumstances, become his own.
...the safest course is to do nothing against one's conscience. With this secret, we can enjoy life and have no fear from death.
A conservative is a man who believes that nothing should be done for the first time.
A conservative government is an organized hypocrisy.
I am a Conservative to preserve all that is good in our constitution, a Radical to remove all that is bad. I seek to preserve property and to respect order, and I equally decry the appeal to the passions of the many or the prejudices of the few.
The conservative in financial circles I have often described as a man who thinks nothing new ought ever to be adopted for the first time.
A conservative is a man with two perfectly good legs who, however, has never learned to walk forward.
The true conservative is the man who has a real concern for injustices and takes thought against the day of reckoning.
The most radical revolutionary will become a conservative the day after the revolution.
The radical of one century is the conservative of the next. The radical invents the views. When he has worn them out the conservative adopts them.
When you are right you cannot be too radical; when you are wrong, you cannot be too conservative.
Men are conservatives when they are least vigorous, or when they are most luxurious. They are conservatives after dinner.
It only takes 20 years for a liberal to become a conservative without changing a single idea.
I never dared to be radical when young For fear it would make me conservative when old.
A conservative is a man who sits and thinks, mostly sits.
Bore: one who has the power of speech but not the capacity for conversation.
Talking with you is sort of the conversational equivalent of an out of body experience.
Saying what we think gives us a wider conversational range than saying what we know.
Each person's life is lived as a series of conversations.
The real art of conversation is not only to say the right thing at the right place but to leave unsaid the wrong thing at the tempting moment.
Education begins a gentleman, conversation completes him.
Few are agreeable in conversation, because each thinks more of what he intends to say than of what others are saying, and listens no more when he himself has a chance to speak.
To listen closely and reply well is the highest perfection we are able to attain in the art of conversation.
I often quote myself. It adds spice to my conversation.
There isn’t much better in this life than finding a way to spend a few hours in conversation with people you respect and love. You have to carve this time out of your life because you aren’t really living without it.
Anecdotes and maxims are rich treasures to the man of the world, for he knows how to introduce the former at fit place in conversation.
One of the best rules in conversation is, never to say a thing which any of the company can reasonably wish had been left unsaid.
Let us make a special effort to stop communicating with each other, so we can have some conversation.
Don't knock the weather. If it didn't change once in a while, nine out of ten people couldn't start a conversation.
Spoken words evaporated into the air just as easily as burned letters, but the sound of them seemed immortal. It was as if a word spoken could not be destroyed.
Most conversations are simply monologues delivered in the presence of witnesses.
The character of a man is known from his conversations.
Conversation is food for the soul.
You can discover more about a person in an hour of play than in a year of conversation.
Conversation is an art in which a man has all mankind for his competitors, for it is that which all are practising every day while they live.
I don't know how to have casual conversation. You think you're talking about one thing, and either you are and it's incredibly boring, or you're not because it's subtext and you need a decoder ring.
Your ignorance, cramps my conversation.
He had occasional flashes of silence, that made his conversation perfectly delightful.
Silence is one of the great arts of conversation, as allowed by Cicero himself, who says, 'there is not only an art, but an eloquence in it.' A well bred woman may easily and effectually promote the most useful and elegant conversation without speaking a word. The modes of speech are scarcely more variable than the modes of silence.
It's always difficult to make conversation with a drunk, and there's no denying it, the sober are at a disadvantage with him.
Conversation should be pleasant without scurrility, witty without affectation, free without indecency, learned without conceitedness, novel without falsehood.
Courage is the price that Life exacts for granting peace.
Life shrinks or expands in proportion to one's courage.
Courage is not simply one of the virtues , but the form of every virtue at the testing point.
Live as brave men; and if fortune is adverse, front its blows with brave hearts.
Courage is the ladder on which all the other virtues mount.
The bravest thing you can do when you are not brave is to profess courage and act accordingly.
Courage is fear that has said its prayers.
I would rather be a coward than brave because people hurt you when you are brave.
Courage is doing what you're afraid to do. There can be no courage unless you're scared.
Few men are willing to brave the disapproval of their fellows, the censure of their colleagues, the wrath of their society. Moral courage is a rarer commodity than bravery in battle or great intelligence. Yet it is the one essential, vital quality of those who seek to change a world which yields most painfully to change
A coward turns away, but a brave man's choice is danger.
Perfect courage means doing unwitnessed what he would be capable of with the world looking on.
Courage is the art of being the only one who knows you're scared to death.
I wanted you to see what real courage is, instead of getting the idea that courage is a man with a gun in his hand. It's when you know you're licked before you begin but you begin anyway and you see it through no matter what.
A timid person is frightened before a danger, a coward during the time, and a courageous person afterward.
The stories of past courage can define that ingredient-they can teach, they can offer hope, they can provide inspiration. But they cannot supply courage itself. For this each man must look into his own soul.
Courage and perseverance have a magical talisman, before which difficulties disappear and obstacles vanish into air.
Courage is being scared to death - but saddling up anyway.
The worst thing of all is standing by when folks are doing something wrong.
If courage wasn't a standard result of aging, it meant that the young could somehow acquire it as well.
Courage is resistance to fear, mastery of fear - not absence of fear.
It is curious that physical courage should be so common in the world and moral courage so rare.
Let bravery be thy choice, but not bravado.
The strongest, most generous, and proudest of all virtues is true courage.
The only courage that matters is the kind that gets you from one moment to the next.
A hero is no braver than an ordinary man, but he is braver five minutes longer.
When you meet your antagonist, do everything in a mild and agreeable manner. Let your courage be as keen, but at the same time as polished, as your sword.
Keep your fears to yourself, but share your courage with others.
Fortune helps the brave.
He who despairs over an event is a coward, but he who holds hope for the human condition is a fool.
I would rather be a coward than brave because people hurt you when you are brave.
A coward turns away, but a brave man's choice is danger.
None but a coward dares to boast that he has never known fear.
Patience has its limits. Take it too far, and it's cowardice.
A timid person is frightened before a danger, a coward during the time, and a courageous person afterward.
There are several good protections against temptations, but the surest is cowardice.
A brave man dies but once, a coward many times. 
Many would be cowards if they had courage enough.
The real hero is always a hero by mistake; he dreams of being an honest coward like everybody else.
Cowardice asks: Is it safe? Expediency asks: Is it politic? But Conscience asks: Is it right?
A thought which, quarter'd, hath but one part wisdom and ever three parts coward.
Conscience does make cowards of us all, and thus the native hue of resolution is sicklied o'er with the pale cast of thought.
Cowards die many times before their deaths; The valiant never taste of death but once. 
Cowards die many times before their deaths; The valiant never taste of death but once. Of all the wonders that I yet have heard, It seems to me most strange that men should fear; Seeing that death, a necessary end, Will come when it will come.
Cowards die many times before their deaths; the valiant never taste of death but once.
The secret to creativity is knowing how to hide your sources.
Frugality without creativity is deprivation.
So you see, imagination needs moodling - long, inefficient, happy idling, dawdling and puttering.
The creation of something new is not accomplished by the intellect but by the play instinct acting from inner necessity. The creative mind plays with the objects it loves.
Creativity is a drug I cannot live without.
The problem is never how to get new, innovative thoughts into your mind, but how to get old ones out. Every mind is a building filled with archaic furniture. Clean out a corner of your mind and creativity will instantly fill it.
There were always people like the pope. They serve a certain function, of course. They subsidize us. But, they don't create anything and they must never be allowed to stop the artist from creating.
Humanity can be quite cold to those whose eyes see the world differently.
Observe Everything.  Communicate Well.  Draw, Draw, Draw.
Creativity can solve almost any problem. The creative act, the defeat of habit by originality, overcomes everything.
When Alexander the Great visited Diogenes and asked whether he could do anything for the famed teacher, Diogenes replied: 'Only stand out of my light.' Perhaps some day we shall know how to heighten creativity. Until then, one of the best things we can do for creative men and women is to stand out of their light.
To live a creative life, we must lose our fear of being wrong.
Creativity is...seeing something that doesn't exist already. You need to find out how you can bring it into being and that way be a playmate with God.
Creativity represents a miraculous coming together of the uninhibited energy of the child with its apparent opposite and enemy, the sense of order imposed on the disciplined adult intelligence.
Every child is an artist. The problem is how to remain an artist once he grows up.
I started concentrating so hard on my vision that I lost sight.
Creativity is allowing yourself to make mistakes. Art is knowing which ones to keep.
Every time we say, "Let there be!" in any form, something happens.
Creative work is play. It is free speculation using materials of one's chosen form.
The most potent muse of all is our own inner child.
The noun of self becomes a verb. This flashpoint of creation in the present moment is where work and play merge.
Don’t let the fear of not pleasing someone stop you from being creative.
The goal isn’t to make something everyone will love; the goal is to get excited, and make a thing where something wasn’t before.
The reason there is so little crime in Germany is that it's against the law.
Crime does not pay ... as well as politics.
Life is nothing but a competition to be the criminal rather than the victim.
When you think of the long and gloomy history of man, you will find more hideous crimes have been committed in the name of obedience than have ever been committed in the name of rebellion.
Crooks are early adopters.
History is indeed little more than the register of the crimes, follies and misfortunes of mankind.
Crime is naught but misdirected energy.
Obviously crime pays, or there'd be no crime.
Criminals do not die by the hands of the law. They die by the hands of other men.
Behind every great fortune there is a crime.
Criminal: A person with predatory instincts who has not sufficient capital to form a corporation.
Going to trial with a lawyer who considers your whole life-style a Crime in Progress is not a happy prospect.
A crime which is the crime of many none avenge.
We have a criminal jury system which is superior to any in the world; and its efficiency is only marred by the difficulty of finding twelve men every day who don't know anything and can't read.
The most dangerous criminal may be the man gifted with reason, but with no morals.
Crime butchers innocence to secure a throne, and innocence struggles with all its might against the attempts of crime.
The judge is condemned when the criminal is absolved.
There is no den in the wide world to hide a rogue. Commit a crime and the earth is made of glass. Commit a crime, and it seems as if a coat of snow fell on the ground, such as reveals in the woods the track of every partridge, and fox, and squirrel.
The key is to commit crimes so confusing that police feel too stupid to even write a crime report about them.
Indeed, history is nothing more than a tableau of crimes and misfortunes.
Murder is unique in that it abolishes the party it injures, so that society has to take the place of the victim and on his behalf demand atonement or grant forgiveness; it is the one crime in which society has a direct interest.
Organized crime in America takes in over forty billion dollars a year and spends very little on office supplies.
How much easier it is to be critical than to be correct.
Asking a working writer what he thinks about critics is like asking a lamppost how it feels about dogs.
Any fool can criticize, condemn, and complain - and most fools do.
If you are not criticized, you may not be doing much.
After all, one knows one's weak points so well, that it's rather bewildering to have the critics overlook them and invent others.
To avoid criticism do nothing, say nothing, be nothing.
Do what you feel in your heart to be right - for you'll be criticized anyway. You'll be damned if you do, and damned if you don't.
Honest criticism is hard to take, particularly from a relative, a friend, an acquaintance, or a stranger.
Criticism is prejudice made plausible.
No degree of dullness can safeguard a work against the determination of critics to find it fascinating.
Now, in reality, the world have paid too great a compliment to critics, and have imagined them to be men of much greater profundity than they really are.
Pay no attention to what the critics say... Remember, a statue has never been set up in honor of a critic!
Against criticism a man can neither protest nor defend himself; he must act in spite of it, and then it will gradually yield to him.
Any reviewer who expresses rage and loathing for a novel is preposterous. He or she is like a person who has put on full armor and attacked a hot fudge sundae.
Never criticize a man until you've walked a mile in his moccasins.
I never met anybody who said when they were a kid, "I wanna grow up and be a critic."
One cannot review a bad book without showing off.
People ask for criticism, but they only want praise.
Criticism comes easier than craftsmanship.
The cure for boredom is curiosity. There is no cure for curiosity.
Only the curious will learn and only the resolute overcome the obstacles to learning. The quest quotient has always excited me more than the intelligence quotient.
Curiosity killed the cat, but for a while I was a suspect.
What we have to do is to be forever curiously testing new opinions and courting new impressions.
Seize the moment of excited curiosity on any subject to solve your doubts; for if you let it pass, the desire may never return, and you may remain in ignorance.
Idealism is what precedes experience; cynicism is what follows.
The power of accurate observation is commonly called cynicism by those who have not got it.
A cynic is a man who, when he smells flowers, looks around for a coffin.
My pessimism extends to the point of even suspecting the sincerity of the pessimists.
Cynicism is an unpleasant way of saying the truth.
No matter how cynical you get, it is impossible to keep up.
What is a cynic? A man who knows the price of everything and the value of nothing.
Cynicism is not realistic and tough. It's unrealistic and kind of cowardly because it means you don't have to try.
Cynics regarded everybody as equally corrupt... Idealists regarded everybody as equally corrupt, except themselves.
A cynic is not merely one who reads bitter lessons from the past, he is one who is prematurely disappointed in the future.
Never be a cynic, even a gentle one. Never help out a sneer, even at the devil.
I would not know what the spirit of a philosopher might wish more to be than a good dancer.
If you cannot get rid of the family skeleton, you may as well make it dance.
Almost nobody dances sober, unless they happen to be insane.
Dance is the hidden language of the soul.
The dance is a poem of which each movement is a word.
Every day brings a chance for you to draw in a breath, kick off your shoes, and dance.
A sympathetic Scot summed it all up very neatly in the remark, "You should make a point of trying every experience once, excepting incest and folk dancing."
Death is more universal than life; everyone dies but not everyone lives.
When I pass, speak freely of my shortcomings and my flaws. Learn from them, for I'll have no ego to injure.
Death is better, a milder fate than tyranny.
There is some comfort in dying surrounded by one's children.
We do not die because we have to die; we die because one day, and not so long ago, our consciousness was forced to deem it necessary.
Do not fear death so much, but rather the inadequate life.
For certain is death for the bornAnd certain is birth for the dead;Therefore over the inevitableThou shouldst not grieve.
He not busy being born is busy dying.
I'd rather get my brains blown out in the wild than wait in terror at the slaughterhouse.
The killing was the best part. It was the dying I couldn't take.
Be open to your dreams, people. Embrace that distant shore. Because our mortal journey is over all too soon.
A man should not leave this earth with unfinished business. He should live each day as if it was a pre-flight check. He should ask each morning, am I prepared to lift-off?
Death is the enemy. I spent 10 years of my life singlemindedly studying, practicing, fighting hand to hand in close quarters to defeat the enemy, to send him back bloodied and humble and I am not going to roll over and surrender.
I am going to concentrate on what's important in life. I'm going to strive everyday to be a kind and generous and loving person. I'm going to keep death right here, so that anytime I even think about getting angry at you or anybody else, I'll see death and I'll remember.
It's no accident that the church and the graveyard stand side by side. The city of the dead sleeps encircled by the city of the living.
If wild my breast and sore my pride, I bask in dreams of suicide, If cool my heart and high my head I think "How lucky are the dead.
I'm afraid I'm being an awful nuisance.
Death is nothing to us, since when we are, death has not come, and when death has come, we are not.
I hope the leaving is joyful; and I hope never to return.
There's a strange sort of quiet when you're dying. It's as if you're in a glass room, and the walls keep getting thicker and thicker.
Life does not cease to be funny when people die any more than it ceases to be serious when people laugh.
If you live to be one hundred, you've got it made. Very few people die past that age.
There is no cure for birth and death save to enjoy the interval.
Pale Death with impartial tread beats at the poor man's cottage door and at the palaces of kings.
Death can sneak up on you like a silent kitten, surprising you with it's touch and you have a right to act surprised. Other times death stomps in the front door, unwanted and unannounced, and makes it's noisy way to your seat on the sofa.
I am not dying, not anymore than any of us are at any moment. We run, hopefully as fast as we can, and then everyone must stop. We can only choose how we handle the race.
Life is pleasant. Death is peaceful. It's the transition that's troublesome.
I can’t talk about our love story, so I will talk about math. I am not a mathematician, but I know this: There are infinite numbers between 0 and 1. There’s .1 and .12 and .112 and an infinite collection of others. Of course, there is a bigger infinite set of numbers between 0 and 2, or between 0 and a million. Some infinities are bigger than other infinities. A writer we used to like taught us that. There are days, many of them, when I resent the size of my unbounded set. I want more numbers than I’m likely to get. But, my love, I cannot tell you how thankful I am for our little infinity. I wouldn’t trade it for the world. You gave me a forever within the numbered days, and I’m grateful.
If the inevitability of human oblivion worries you, I encourage you to ignore it.
If you were to go [to the Rijksmuseum], and hopefully someday you will, you would see a lot of paintings of dead people. You'd see Jesus on the cross, and you'd see a dude getting stabbed in the neck, and you'd see people dying at sea and in battle and a parade of martyrs. But Not. One. Single. Cancer. Kid. Nobody biting it from the plague or smallpox or yellow fever or whatever, because there is no glory in illness. There is no meaning to it. There is no honor in dying of.
The more alternatives, the more difficult the choice.
The first step to getting the things you want out of life is this: Decide what you want.
Our choices add up; each one influences others, and cumulatively a series of delightful short-term choices can leave us much worse off in the long run.
A person has three choices in life. You can swim against the tide and get exhausted, or you can tread water and let the tide sweep you away, or you can swim with the tide, and let it take you where it wants you to go.
I think that somehow, we learn who we really are and then live with that decision.
The strongest principle of growth lies in human choice.
Destiny is a name often given in retrospect to choices that had dramatic consequences.
It is our choices...that show what we truly are, far more than our abilities.
A pessimist, confronted with two bad choices, chooses both. 
The self is not something ready-made, but something in continuous formation through choice of action.
An executive is a person who always decides; sometimes he decides correctly, but he always decides.
A weak man has doubts before a decision, a strong man has them afterwards.
When I make up my mind to do a thing it stays made up.
When it is not necessary to make a decision, it is necessary not to make a decision.
Check your ego at the door and check your gut instead. Every right decision I have ever made has come from my gut. Every wrong decision I've made was the result of me not listening to the greater voice of myself
If it doesn't feel right, don't do it. That's the lesson. That lesson alone, will save you a lot of grief. Even doubt means don't.
When you don't know what to do, get still. Get very still until you do know what to do.
When yu' can't have why you choose, yu' just choose what you have.
Choices are made in brief seconds and paid for in the time that remains.
Give no decision till both sides thou'st heard.
We must give lengthy deliberation to what has to be decided once and for all.
If you limit your choices only to what seems possible or reasonable, you disconnect yourself from what you truly want, and all that is left is a compromise.
Remembering that I'll be dead soon is the most important tool I've ever encountered to help me make the big choices in life.
Do not be afraid of defeat. you are never so near victory as when defeated in a good cause
Exile, for no other motive than ease, would be the last defeat, with no seed of future victory in it.
Victory attained by violence is tantamount to a defeat, for it is momentary.
There are some defeats more triumphant than victories.
You can take from every experience what it has to offer you. And you cannot be defeated if you just keep taking one breath followed by another.
When defeat is inevitable, it is wisest to yield.
Be careful that victories do not carry the seed of future defeats.
A good man would prefer to be defeated than to defeat injustice by evil means.
Victorious warriors win first and then go to war, while defeated warriors go to war first and then seek to win.
Far better it is to dare mighty things, to win glorious triumphs even though checkered by failure, than to rank with those poor spirits who neither enjoy nor suffer much because they live in the gray twilight that knows neither victory nor defeat.
What is defeat? Nothing but education; nothing but the first step to something better.
Self-criticism is the secret weapon of democracy, and candor and confession are good for the public soul
Democracy consists of choosing your dictators, after they've told you what you think it is you want to hear.
If liberty and equality, as is thought by some are chiefly to be found in democracy, they will be best attained when all persons alike share in the government to the utmost.
The great thing about democracy is that it gives every voter a chance to do something stupid.
Democracy means government by discussion, but it is only effective if you can stop people talking.
Democracy is the recurrent suspicion that more than half of the people are right more than half the time.
Democracy means government by the uneducated, while aristocracy means government by the badly educated.
Democracy is a device that ensures we shall be governed no better than we deserve.
Democracy substitutes election by the incompetent many for appointment by the corrupt few.
The whole dream of democracy is to raise the proletarian to the level of stupidity attained by the bourgeois.
Democracy is the theory that the common people know what they want and deserve to get it good and hard.
The cure for the evils of democracy is more democracy!
Under democracy one party always devotes its chief energies to trying to prove that the other party is unfit to rule - and both commonly succeed, and are right.
Democracy is based upon the conviction that there are extraordinary possibilities in ordinary people.
The idea of an election is much more interesting to me than the election itself...The act of voting is in itself the defining moment.
Democracy is a process by which the people are free to choose the man who will get the blame.
Men write many fine and plausible arguments in support of monarchy, but the fact remains that where every man has a voice, brutal laws are impossible.
Democracy is the name we give the people whenever we need them.
In democracy it's your vote that counts; In feudalism it's your count that votes.
Many forms of Government have been tried, and will be tried in this world of sin and woe. No one pretends that democracy is perfect or all-wise. Indeed, it has been said that democracy is the worst form of government except all those other forms that have been tried from time to time.
A republican government is slow to move, yet once in motion it's momentum becomes irresistible.
It's not the voting that's democracy, it's the counting.
On account of being a democracy and run by the people, we are the only nation in the world that has to keep a government four years, no matter what it does.
Luck is the residue of design.
To dismiss front-end design as mere ‘icing’ is to jeopardize the success of any site.
Design is directed toward human beings. To design is to solve human problems by identifying them and executing the best solution.
To design is to communicate clearly by whatever means you can control or master.
Design can be art. Design can be aesthetics. Design is so simple, that's why it is so complicated.
Design is not just what it looks like and feels like. Design is how it works.
In most people's vocabularies, design means veneer. It's interior decorating. It's the fabric of the curtains of the sofa. But to me, nothing could be further from the meaning of design. Design is the fundamental soul of a human-made creation that ends up expressing itself in successive outer layers of the product or service.
It's really hard to design products by focus groups. A lot of times, people don't know what they want until you show it to them.
The wise man will love; all others will desire.
One must not lose desires. They are mighty stimulants to creativeness, to love, and to long life.
Man is an animal which, alone among the animals, refuses to be satisfied by the fulfilment of animal desires.
Dwell not upon thy weariness, thy strength shall be according to the measure of thy desire.
Again, men in general desire the good, and not merely what their fathers had.
I count him braver who overcomes his desires than him who overcomes his enemies.
It is the nature of desire not to be satisfied, and most men live only for the gratification of it.
How helpless we are, like netted birds, when we are caught by desire!
If you greatly desire something, have the guts to stake everything on obtaining it.
In men of the highest character and noblest genius there is to be found an insatiable desire for honour, command, power, and glory.
Let your desires be ruled by reason. (Appetitus Rationi Pareat)
He who desires is always poor.
While we don't have much say over the desires that we have, we certainly can decide which we prefer-and then search for ways to act on that basis.
There are two tragedies in life. One is not to get your heart's desire. The other is to get it.
If we desire to avoid insult, we must be able to repel it; if we desire to secure peace, one of the most powerful instruments of our rising prosperity, it must be known, that we are at all times ready for War.
Man is the only animal whose desires increase as they are fed; the only animal that is never satisfied.
Manifest plainness,Embrace simplicity,Reduce selfishness,Have few desires.
There is no calamity greater than lavish desires.There is no greater guilt than discontentment.And there is no greater disaster than greed.
Some prices are just too high, no matter how much you may want the prize. The one thing you can't trade for your heart's desire is your heart.
One must desire something to be alive.
A human being has a natural desire to have more of a good thing than he needs.
When you relinquish the desire to control your future, you can have more happiness.
Desires are only the lack of something: and those who have the greatest desires are in a worse condition than those who have none, or very slight ones.
We desire nothing so much as what we ought not to have.
Desire creates the power.
Life ought to be a struggle of desire toward adventures whose nobility will fertilize the soul.
What makes the engine go? Desire, desire, desire.
Those who restrain desire, do so because theirs is weak enough to be restrained.
Every man has business and desire, Such as it is.
Destiny waits alike for the free man as well as for him enslaved by another's might.
No trumpets sound when the important decisions of our life are made. Destiny is made known silently.
Destiny is but a phrase of the weak human heart - the dark apology for every error. The strong and virtuous admit no destiny. On earth conscience guides; in heaven God watches. And destiny is but the phantom we invoke to silence the one and dethrone the other.
There is a mysterious cycle in human events. To some generations much is given. Of other generations much is expected. This generation of Americans has a rendezvous with destiny.
Destiny is a name often given in retrospect to choices that had dramatic consequences.
It's choice - not chance - that determines your destiny.
Our problems are man-made, therefore they may be solved by man. No problem of human destiny is beyond human beings.
I think it's absolutely a blessing when you just know what your purpose is and your destiny. I don't think it's a curse at all.
A man that don't believe in destiny don't need to know what his destiny is.
Young people have an almost biological destiny to be hopeful.
Often we don't even realize who we're meant to be because we're so busy trying to live out someone else's ideas. But other people and their opinions hold no power in defining our destiny.
Man is asked to make of himself what he is supposed to become to fulfill his destiny.
Great people and great athletes realize early in their lives their destiny, and accept it. Even if they do not consciously realize the how, the where, the what.
Destiny is for people who are too lazy to create alternate timelines.
Anatomy is destiny.
It is a mistake to try to look too far ahead. The chain of destiny can only be grasped one link at a time.
We are face to face with our destiny and we must meet it with high and resolute courage. For us is the life of action, of strenuous performance of duty; let us live in the harness, striving mightily; let us rather run the risk of wearing out than rusting out.
Watch your thoughts, they become words. Watch your words, they become actions. Watch your actions, they become habits. Watch your habits, they become your character. Watch your character, it becomes your destiny.
Destiny is no matter of chance. It is a matter of choice. It is not a thing to be waited for, it is a thing to be achieved.
The ancient saying is no heresy, hanging and wiving goes by destiny.
A great marriage is not when the 'perfect couple' comes together. It is when an imperfect couple learns to enjoy their differences.
Differences of habit and language are nothing at all if our aims are identical and our hearts are open.
Toward no crime have men shown themselves so cold-bloodedly cruel as in punishing differences of belief.
If we cannot end now our differences, at least we can help make the world safe for diversity.
So, let us not be blind to our differences - but let us also direct attention to our common interests and to the means by which those differences can be resolved.
Honest differences are often a healthy sign of progress.
Dignity consists not in possessing honors, but in the consciousness that we deserve them.
No race can prosper till it learns that there is as much dignity in tilling a field as in writing a poem.
Where is there dignity unless there is honesty?
The only kind of dignity which is genuine is that which is not diminished by the indifference of others.
Dignity comes not from control, but from understanding who you are and taking your rightful place in the world.
Human Dignity has gleamed only now and then and here and there, in lonely splendor, throughout the ages, a hope of the better men, never an achievement of the majority.
Be mild with the mild, shrewd with the crafty, confiding to the honest, rough to the ruffian, and a thunderbolt to the liar. But in all this, never be unmindful of your own dignity.
Remember this-that there is a proper dignity and proportion to be observed in the performance of every act of life.
One's dignity may be assaulted, vandalized and cruelly mocked, but cannot be taken away unless it is surrendered.
Dignity and love do not blend well, nor do they continue long together.
Self-respect is the fruit of discipline; the sense of dignity grows with the ability to say no to oneself.
Let not a man guard his dignity, but let his dignity guard him.
It is not wealth one asks for, but just enough to preserve one's dignity, to work unhampered, to be generous, frank and independent.
There is a healthful hardiness about real dignity that never dreads contact and communion with others, however humble.
One of the advantages of being disorderly is that one is constantly making exciting discoveries.
A discovery is said to be an accident meeting a prepared mind.
Discovery consists of seeing what everybody has seen and thinking what nobody has thought.
One doesn't discover new lands without consenting to lose sight of the shore for a very long time.
The more original a discovery, the more obvious it seems afterwards.
The greatest obstacle to discovery is not ignorance - it is the illusion of knowledge.
There is a theory which states that if ever anybody discovers exactly what the Universe is for and why it is here, it will instantly disappear and be replaced by something even more bizarre and inexplicable. There is another theory which states that this has already happened.
The beginning of knowledge is the discovery of something we do not understand.
All truths are easy to understand once they are discovered; the point is to discover them.
The most exciting phrase to hear in science, the one that heralds new discoveries, is not 'Eureka!' (I found it!) but 'That's funny ...'
I do not know what I may appear to the world; but to myself I seem to have been only like a boy playing on the seashore, and diverting myself in now and then finding a smoother pebble or a prettier shell than ordinary, whilst the great ocean of truth lay all undiscovered before me.
If I have ever made any valuable discoveries, it has been owing more to patient attention, than to any other talent.
Mistakes are the portals of discovery.
The real voyage of discovery consists not in seeking new landscapes but in having new eyes.
There is no harm in doubt and skepticism, for it is through these that new discoveries are made.
He who never made a mistake never made a discovery.
If a dog jumps in your lap, it is because he is fond of you; but if a cat does the same thing, it is because your lap is warmer.
Don't accept your dog's admiration as conclusive evidence that you are wonderful.
I loathe people who keep dogs. They are cowards who haven't got the guts to bite people themselves.
Yet the dogs eat of the crumbs which fall from their masters' table.
Yesterday I was a dog. Today I'm a dog. Tomorrow I'll probably still be a dog. Sigh! There's so little hope for advancement.
You can't surprise a man with a dog.
It's funny how dogs and cats know the inside of folks better than other folks do, isn't it?
If you are a dog and your owner suggests that you wear a sweater, suggest that he wear a tail.
When a dog runs at you, whistle for him.
The dog was created especially for children. He is the god of frolic.
A dog owns nothing, yet is seldom dissatisfied.
Cats are smarter than dogs. You can't get eight cats to pull a sled through snow.
Who knew that dog saliva can mend a broken heart?
Old age means realizing you will never own all the dogs you wanted to.
My dog is worried about the economy because Alpo is up to 99 cents a can. That's almost $7.00 in dog money.
When a dog bites a man, that is not news, because it happens so often. But if a man bites a dog, that is news.
A dog is the greatest gift a parent can give a child. OK, a good education, then a dog.
A person can learn a lot from a dog, even a loopy one like ours. Marley taught me about living each day with unbridled exuberance and joy, about seizing the moment and following your heart. He taught me to appreciate the simple things - a walk in the woods, a fresh snowfall, a nap in a shaft of winter sunlight. And as he grew old and achy, he taught me about optimism in the face of adversity. Mostly, he taught me about friendship and selflessness and, above all else, unwavering loyalty.
We could have bought a small yacht with what we spent on our dog an dall the things he destroyed. Then again, how many yachts wait by the door all day for your return?
A dog is the only thing on earth that loves you more than he loves himself.
If you pick up a starving dog and make him prosperous, he will not bite you. This is the principal difference between a dog and a man.
We are alone, absolutely alone on this chance planet: and, amid all the forms of life that surround us, not one, excepting the dog, has made an alliance with us.
A door is what a dog is perpetually on the wrong side of.
On the Internet, nobody knows you're a dog.
I wonder if other dogs think poodles are members of a weird religious cult.
A boy can learn a lot from a dog: obedience, loyalty, and the importance of turning around three times before lying down.
Dogs are not our whole life, but they make our lives whole.
I like pigs. Dogs look up to us. Cats look down on us. Pigs treat us as equals.
Did you ever walk into a room and forget why you walked in? I think that's how dogs spend their lives.
Doubt 'til thou canst doubt no more...doubt is thought and thought is life. Systems which end doubt are devices for drugging thought.
There are two ways to slide easily through life; to believe everything or to doubt everything. Both ways save us from thinking.
A mind troubled by doubt cannot focus on the course to victory.
I think we ought always to entertain our opinions with some measure of doubt. I shouldn't wish people dogmatically to believe any philosophy, not even mine.
The whole problem with the world is that fools and fanatics are always so certain of themselves, but wiser people so full of doubts.
Doubt whom you will, but never yourself.
Just think of the tragedy of teaching children not to doubt.
To have doubted one's own first principles is the mark of a civilized man.
Beliefs are what divide people. Doubt unites them.
If you would be a real seeker after truth, it is necessary that at least once in your life you doubt, as far as possible, all things.
I show you doubt, to prove that faith exists.
To believe with certainty we must begin with doubting.
Doubt is not a pleasant condition, but certainty is absurd.
Our doubts are traitors, And make us lose the good we oft might win By fearing to attempt.
I respect faith, but doubt is what gets you an education.
I know how men in exile feed on dreams of hope.
To accomplish great things, we must not only act, but also dream; not only plan, but also believe.
Hope is a waking dream.
Dreams that do come true can be as unsettling as those that don't.
To want to be what one can be is purpose in life.
He felt that his whole life was some kind of dream and he sometimes wondered whose it was and whether they were enjoying it.
Those who dream by day are cognizant of many things which escape those who dream only by night.
The wisest men follow their own direction.
Keep true to the dreams of thy youth.
You see things; and you say, 'Why?' But I dream things that never were; and I say, "Why not?"
Human beings have an inalienable right to invent themselves.
They say dreams are the windows of the soul--take a peek and you can see the inner workings, the nuts and bolts.
Dreams surely are difficult, confusing, and not everything in them is brought to pass for mankind. For fleeting dreams have two gates: one is fashioned of horn and one of ivory. Those which pass through the one of sawn ivory are deceptive, bringing tidings which come to nought, but those which issue from the one of polished horn bring true results when a mortal sees them.
We need men who can dream of things that never were.
Dreams come true. Without that possibility, nature would not incite us to have them.
I do not want to die... until I have faithfully made the most of my talent and cultivated the seed that was placed in me until the last small twig has grown.
My bounce-around life had taught me that dreams were dangerous things - they look solid in your mind, but you just try to reach for them. It's like gathering clouds.
There should be fireworks, at least, when a dream dies.
I think it is often easier to make progress on mega-ambitious dreams. Since no one else is crazy enough to do it, you have little competition. In fact, there are so few people this crazy that I feel like I know them all by first name.
You know what it's like to wake up in the middle of the night with a vivid dream? And you know that if you don't have a pencil and pad by the bed, it will be completely gone by the next morning. Sometimes it's important to wake up and stop dreaming. When a really great dream shows up, grab it.
You never lose a dream. It just incubates as a hobby.
It has never been my object to record my dreams, just to realize them.
One must desire something to be alive.
Now, I say to you today my friends, even though we face the difficulties of today and tomorrow, I still have a dream. It is a dream deeply rooted in the American dream. I have a dream that one day this nation will rise up and live out the true meaning of its creed: - 'We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created equal.'
My dreams were all my own; I accounted for them to nobody; they were my refuge when annoyed - my dearest pleasure when free.
I've come to believe that each of us has a personal calling that's as unique as a fingerprint - and that the best way to succeed is to discover what you love and then find a way to offer it to others in the form of service, working hard, and also allowing the energy of the universe to lead you.
The key to realizing a dream is to focus not on success but significance - and then even the small steps and little victories along your path will take on greater meaning.
The aim of life is self-development. To realize one's nature perfectly - that is what each of us is here for.
If you stop dreaming, you're just sleeping.
And malt does more than Milton can To justify God's ways to man.
Drink no longer water, but use a little wine for thy stomach's sake.
Electricity is actually made up of extremely tiny particles called electrons, that you cannot see with the naked eye unless you have been drinking.
If you drink, don't drive. Don't even putt.
Bacchus hath drowned more men than Neptune.
Always do sober what you said you'd do drunk. That will teach you to keep your mouth shut.
Great people talk about ideas, average people talk about things, and small people talk about wine.
My Grandmother is over eighty and still doesn't need glasses. Drinks right out of the bottle.
When I read about the evils of drinking, I gave up reading.
[Water is] the only drink for a wise man.
It is better to hide ignorance, but it is hard to do this when we relax over wine.
The wine urges me on, the bewitching wine, which sets even a wise man to singing and to laughing gently and rouses him up to dance and brings forth words which were better unspoken.
Nothing anyone says in a bar is true.
The trouble with jogging is that the ice falls out of your glass.
One reason I don't drink is that I want to know when I am having a good time.
I envy people who drink. At least they have something to blame everything on.
Work is the curse of the drinking classes.
Slap a mask on a drunk and you're going to have trouble. It's like having a live reenactment of anonymous forum comments.
Drinking makes such fools of people, and people are such fools to begin with, that it's compounding a felony.
I always keep a supply of stimulant handy in case I see a snake--which I also keep handy.
Reminds me of my safari in Africa. Somebody forgot the corkscrew and for several days we had to live on nothing but food and water.
It's always difficult to make conversation with a drunk, and there's no denying it, the sober are at a disadvantage with him.
I believe that God left certain drugs growing naturally upon our planet to help speed up and facilitate our evolution.
Half of the modern drugs could well be thrown out of the window, except that the birds might eat them.
I never took hallucinogenic drugs because I never wanted my consciousness expanded one unnecessary iota.
I hate to advocate drugs, alcohol, violence, or insanity to anyone, but they've always worked for me.
Everything is a drug. Family, art, causes, new shoes... We're all just tweaking our chem to avoid the void.
Reality is a crutch for people who can't cope with drugs.
I love drugs, but I hate hangovers, and the hatred of the hangover wins by a landslide every time.
Drugs have taught an entire generation of Americans the metric system.
[Addiction's] not about placating the bad dog - it's about feeding the good dog. You still have to feed the bad dog, but only enough so that the ASPCA doesn't bring you up on charges.
The last time somebody said, 'I find I can write much better with a word processor.', I replied, 'They used to say the same thing about drugs.'
Junkies might be easy to knock down, but they're never fragile. They have souls like old leather shoes studded with steel, and they're about as much good as friends.
The truth is, marijuana probably isn't going to make you kill people. Most likely isn't going to fund terrorists, but pot makes you feel fine with being bored and it's when you're bored that you should be learning a new skill or some new science or being creative. If you smoke pot you may grow up to find out that you're not good at anything.
We only know of one duty, and that is to love.
It is the duty of every citizen according to his best capacities to give validity to his convictions in political affairs.
The first duty of a leader is to make himself be loved without courting love. To be loved without 'playing up' to anyone - even to himself.
I came to realize that life lived to help others is the only one that matters and that it is my duty...This is my highest and best use as a human.
A sense of duty is useful in work, but offensive in personal relations. People wish to be liked, not be endured with patient resignation.
The first duty of a man is the seeking after and the investigation of truth.
There are some duties we owe even to those who have wronged us. There is, after all, a limit to retribution and punishment.
There is no duty more obligatory than the repayment of kindness.
There is no such thing as luck. It's a fancy name for being always at our duty, and so sure to be ready when good time comes.
Majesty: when a stupid man is doing something he is ashamed of, he always declares it as his duty.
When a stupid man is doing something he is ashamed of, he always declares that it is his duty.
The reward of one duty is the power to fulfill another.
We have no eternal allies, and we have no perpetual enemies. Our interests are eternal and perpetual, and those interests it is our duty to follow.
The paths of glory at least lead to the grave, but the paths of duty may not get you any where.
The strongest is never strong enough to be always the master, unless he transforms strength into right, and obedience into duty.
How can you come to know yourself? Never by thinking, always by doing. Try to do your duty, and you'll know right away what you amount to.
Duty is ours, results are God's.
Life is not so important as the duties of life.
A duty dodged is like a debt unpaid; it is only deferred, and we must come back and settle the account at last.
When you have a number of disagreeable duties to perform, always do the most disagreeable first.
Attention to our duties provides far greater rewards than beauty and wit. Self-control is what differentiates us from the beasts. Without it, we are merely animals.
I take it as a man's duty to restrain himself.
The dead cannot cry out for justice; it is a duty of the living to do so for them.
Do something every day that you don't want to do; this is the golden rule for acquiring the habit of doing your duty without pain.
The first duty of love is to listen.
Duty then is the sublimest word in the English language. You should do your duty in all things. You can never do more, you should never wish to do less.
There is no duty we so much underrate as the as the duty of being happy.
There is no duty we so much underrate as the duty of being happy.
Be eager to fulfill the smallest duty and flee from transgression for one duty includes another and one transgression induces another transgression.
Property has its duties as well as its rights.
An economist is a man who states the obvious in terms of the incomprehensible.
Acts of sacrifice and decency without regard to what's in it for you create ripple effects. Ones that lift up families and communities, that spread opportunity and boost our economy.
There can be no real individual freedom in the presence of economic insecurity.
If all economists were laid end to end, they would not reach a conclusion.
Economics is extremely useful as a form of employment for economists.
Isn't it interesting that the same people who laugh at science fiction listen to weather forecasts and economists?
An economist is an expert who will know tomorrow why the things he predicted yesterday didn't happen today.
Socialism failed because it couldn't tell the economic truth; capitalism may fail because it couldn't tell the ecological truth.
An economist is a surgeon with an excellent scalpel and a rough-edged lancet, who operates beautifully on the dead and tortures the living.
In all recorded history there has not been one economist who has had to worry about where the next meal would come from.
There are 10^11 stars in the galaxy. That used to be a huge number. But it's only a hundred billion. It's less than the national deficit! We used to call them astronomical numbers. Now we should call them economical numbers.
You don't need fancy highbrow traditions or money to really learn. You just need people with the desire to better themselves.
It is possible to store the mind with a million facts and still be entirely uneducated.
An education isn't how much you have committed to memory, or even how much you know. It's being able to differentiate between what you do know and what you don't.
A well-informed mind is the best security against the contagion of folly and of vice. The vacant mind is ever on the watch for relief, and ready to plunge into error, to escape from the languor of idleness.
Education is the best provision for old age.
It is the mark of an educated mind to be able to entertain a thought without accepting it.
Education is what survives when what has been learned has been forgotten.
The strength of the United States is not the gold at Fort Knox or the weapons of mass destruction that we have, but the sum total of the education and the character of our people.
Everyone has a right to a university degree in America, even if it's in Hamburger Technology.
School is learning things you don't want to know, surrounded by people you wish you didn't know, while working toward a future you don't know will ever come.
The number of books will grow continually, and one can predict that a time will come when it will be almost as difficult to learn anything from books as from the direct study of the whole universe. It will be almost as convenient to search for some bit of truth concealed in nature as it will be to find it hidden away in an immense multitude of bound volumes.
The foundation of every state is the education of its youth.
Education begins a gentleman, conversation completes him.
I didn't go to college at all, any college, and I'm not saying you wasted your time or money, but look at me, I'm a huge celebrity.
Only the educated are free.
America believes in education: the average professor earns more money in a year than a professional athlete earns in a whole week.
Education is simply the soul of a society as it passes from one generation to another.
Education... has produced a vast population able to read but unable to distinguish what is worth reading.
Good teaching is one-fourth preparation and three-fourths theater.
A fool's brain digests philosophy into folly, science into superstition, and art into pedantry. Hence University education.
Human history becomes more and more a race between education and catastrophe.
College isn't the place to go for ideas.
Education has for its object the formation of character.
The great aim of education is not knowledge but action.
Next in importance to freedom and justice is popular education, without which neither freedom nor justice can be permanently maintained.
Bachelor's degrees make pretty good placemats if you get 'em laminated.
That's what college is for - getting as many bad decisions as possible out of the way before you're forced into the real world. I keep a checklist of 'em on the wall in my room.
A university is what a college becomes when the faculty loses interest in students.
It has been my experience that maximizing income is a helluva lot less important than maximizing passion and fulfillment in your both professionally and personally.
When I was in college, I remember fearing that the dreary grind of adulthood would feature infinitely more existential dread than frat parties had, but the opposite has been true for me. I'm much less likely to feel that gnawing fear of aimlessness and nihilism than I used to be and that's partly because education gave me job opportunities, but it's mostly because education gave me perspective and context.
Sadness is poetic. You're lucky to live sad moments. When you let yourself be sad, your body has antibodies. It has happiness that comes rushing in to meet the sadness.
Where we have strong emotions, we're liable to fool ourselves.
When dealing with people, let us remember we are not dealing with creatures of logic. We are dealing with creatures of emotion, creatures bustling with prejudices and motivated by pride and vanity.
When a man is not amused, he feels an involuntary contempt for those who are.
If you want to make people weep, you must weep yourself. If you want to make people laugh, your face must remain serious.
When you own or take responsibility for your feelings, you place yourself in a position of power and control.
When you understand that your feelings are triggered by what you think about an event and not by the event itself, you gain a measure of control. Although you cannot control the things (events) that happen to you, or change your feelings (after all, you feel the way you feel), you can change your thoughts. A change in thoughts often radically alters your feelings.
The sign of an intelligent people is their ability to control emotions by the application of reason.
Feelings are really your GPS system for life. When your supposed to do something, or not supposed to do something, your emotional guidance system lets you know.
The advantage of the emotions is that they lead us astray, and the advantage of science is that it is not emotional.
Cherish your own emotions and never undervalue them.
When you're eighteen your emotions are violent, but they're not durable.
The shaft of the arrow had been feathered with one of the eagle's own plumes. We often give our enemies the means of our own destruction.
He who has a thousand friends has not a friend to spare,And he who has one enemy will meet him everywhere.
Above all things, never be afraid. The enemy who forces you to retreat is himself afraid of you at that very moment.
Observe your enemies, for they first find out your faults.
A wise man gets more use from his enemies than a fool from his friends.
Love your enemies; for they shall tell you all your faults.
I do not regret one professional enemy I have made. Any actor who doesn't dare to make an enemy should get out of the business.
The meeting of two personalities is like the contact of two chemical substances: if there is any reaction, both are transformed.
He hasn't an enemy in the world - but all his friends hate him.
Never explain--your friends do not need it and your enemies will not believe you anyway.
You can discover what your enemy fears most by observing the means he uses to frighten you.
At times one remains faithful to a cause only because its opponents do not cease to be insipid.
Rejoice not at thine enemy's fall - but don't rush to pick him up either.
Forgive your enemies, but never forget their names.
Now the trumpet summons us again—not as a call to bear arms, though arms we need; not as a call to battle, though embattled we are—but a call to bear the burden of a long twilight struggle, year in and year out, "rejoicing in hope, patient in tribulation"—a struggle against the common enemies of man: tyranny, poverty, disease, and war itself.
The enemy is anybody who's going to get you killed, no matter which side he's on.
The rule is perfect: in all matters of opinion our adversaries are insane.
If you want to make peace, you don't talk to your friends. You talk to your enemies.
Never interrupt your enemy when he is making a mistake.
A man cannot be too careful in the choice of his enemies.
Always forgive your enemies; nothing annoys them so much.
We can learn even from our enemies.
Use your enemy's hand to catch a snake.
Treat your friend as if he might become an enemy.
Reveal not every secret you have to a friend, for how can you tell but that friend may hereafter become an enemy. And bring not all mischief you are able to upon an enemy, for he may one day become your friend.
It is hard to fight an enemy who has outposts in your head.
Money can't buy friends, but it can get you a better class of enemy.
Friends may come and go, but enemies accumulate.
Energy and persistence conquer all things.
Love the moment, and the energy of that moment will spread beyond all boundaries.
Crime is naught but misdirected energy.
...happiness gives us the energy which is the basis of health.
Energy is the essence of life. Every day you decide how you're going to use it by knowing what you want and what it takes to reach that goal, and by maintaining focus.
Life engenders life. Energy creates energy. It is by spending oneself that one becomes rich.
Energy is eternal delight.
Don't get me wrong: I love nuclear energy! It's just that I prefer fusion to fission. And it just so happens that there's an enormous fusion reactor safely banked a few million miles from us. It delivers more than we could ever use in just about 8 minutes. And it's wireless!
Engineering is not merely knowing and being knowledgeable, like a walking encyclopedia; engineering is not merely analysis; engineering is not merely the possession of the capacity to get elegant solutions to non-existent engineering problems; engineering is practicing the art of the organized forcing of technological change... Engineers operate at the interface between science and society...
Engineering is the art of organizing and directing men and controlling the forces and materials of nature for the benefit of the human race.
Engineering is a great profession. There is the satisfaction of watching a figment of the imagination emerge through the aid of science to a plan on paper. Then it moves to realisation in stone or metal or energy. Then it brings homes to men or women. Then it elevates the standard of living and adds to the comforts of life. This is the engineer's high privilege.
I don't care what it is, when it has an LCD screen, it makes it better.
Engineers participate in the activities which make the resources of nature available in a form beneficial to man and provide systems which will perform optimally and economically.
The ideal engineer is a composite ... He is not a scientist, he is not a mathematician, he is not a sociologist or a writer; but he may use the knowledge and techniques of any or all of these disciplines in solving engineering problems.
Engineering is an activity other than purely manual and physical work which brings about the utilization of the materials and laws of nature for the good of humanity.
Engineering is the professional art of applying science to the optimum conversion of natural resources to the benefit of man.
Engineering is the practice of safe and economic application of the scientific laws governing the forces and materials of nature by means of organization, design and construction, for the general benefit of mankind.
The engineer is the key figure in the material progress of the world. It is his engineering that makes a reality of the potential value of science by translating scientific knowledge into tools, resources, energy and labor to bring them into the service of man ... To make contributions of this kind the engineer requires the imagination to visualize the needs of society and to appreciate what is possible as well as the technological and broad social age understanding to bring his vision to reality.
Engineering is the professional and systematic application of science to the efficient utilization of natural resources to produce wealth.
Engineering is the science of economy, of conserving the energy, kinetic and potential, provided and stored up by nature for the use of man. It is the business of engineering to utilize this energy to the best advantage, so that there may be the least possible waste.
He was born an Englishman and remained one for years.
England and America are two countries separated by a common language.
The English have no respect for their language, and will not teach their children to speak it.
We don't bother much about dress and manners in England, because as a nation we don't dress well and we've no manners.
We have really everything in common with America nowadays except, of course, language.
This England never did, nor never shall, Lie at the proud foot of a conqueror.
This royal throne of kings, this sceptred isle, This earth of majesty, this seat of Mars, This other Eden, demi-paradise, This fortress built by Nature for herself Against infection and the hand of war, This happy breed of men, this little world, This precious stone set in the silver sea, Which serves it in the office of a wall Or as a moat defensive to a house, Against the envy of less happier lands,-- This blessed plot, this earth, this realm, this England.
Even if you do learn to speak correct English, whom are you going to speak it to?
The English language was carefully, carefully cobbled together by three blind dudes and a German dictionary.
If the English language made any sense, a catastrophe would be an apostrophe with fur.
England and America are two countries separated by a common language.
The English have no respect for their language, and will not teach their children to speak it.
Every English poet should master the rules of grammar before he attempts to bend or break them.
Here will be an old abusing of God's patience and the king's English.
The animals of the planet are in desperate peril... Without free animal life I believe we will lose the spiritual equivalent of oxygen.
I am the Lorax, and I'll yell and I'll shout for the fine things on earth that are on their way out!
I speak for the trees, for the trees have no tongues.
Unless someone like you cares a whole awful lot, nothing is going to get better. It's not.
What is the use of a house if you haven't got a tolerable planet to put it on?
For in the final analysis, our most basic common link, is that we all inhabit this small planet, we all breathe the same air, we all cherish our children's futures, and we are all mortal.
We shall never understand the natural environment until we see it as a living organism. Land can be healthy or sick, fertile or barren, rich or poor, lovingly nurtured or bled white. Our present attitudes and laws governing the ownership and use of land represent an abuse of the concept of private property.... Today you can murder land for private profit. You can leave the corpse for all to see and nobody calls the cops.
Unless man is committed to the belief that all mankind are his brothers, then he labors in vain and hypocritically in the vineyards of equality.
Before God we are all equally wise - and equally foolish.
That all men are equal is a proposition which, at ordinary times, no sane individual has ever given his assent.
If liberty and equality, as is thought by some are chiefly to be found in democracy, they will be best attained when all persons alike share in the government to the utmost.
The only stable state is the one in which all men are equal before the law.
In the state of nature...all men are born equal, but they cannot continue in this equality. Society makes them lose it, and they recover it only by the protection of the law.
The love of democracy is that of equality.
All animals are equal but some animals are more equal than others.
Equality...is the result of human organization. We are not born equal.
It is not true that equality is a law of nature. Nature has no equality. Its sovereign law is subordination and dependence.
As men, we are all equal in the presence of death.
We hold these truths to be self-evident that all men are created equal; that they are endowed by their Creator with certain inalienable rights; that among these are life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness.
Men are equal; it is not birth but virtue that makes the difference.
Politeness, n. The most acceptable hypocrisy.
That's the secret of entertaining. You make your guests feel welcome and at home. If you do that honestly, the rest takes care of itself.
Cleanliness and order are not matters of instinct; they are matters of education, and like most great things, you must cultivate a taste for them.
Good manners will open doors that the best education cannot.
It is wise to apply the oil of refined politeness to the mechanisms of friendship.
Rudeness is the weak man's imitation of strength.
We don't bother much about dress and manners in England, because as a nation we don't dress well and we've no manners.
There is hardly any personal defect which an agreeable manner might not gradually reconcile one to.
One of the greatest victories you can gain over someone is to beat him at politeness.
Doesn't matter what a person's name is as long as he behaves himself.
To have respect for ourselves guides our morals; and to have a deference for others governs our manners.
Don't reserve your best behavior for special occasions. You can't have two sets of manners, two social codes - one for those you admire and want to impress, another for those whom you consider unimportant. You must be the same to all people.
If you aren’t going to say something directly to someone’s face, than don’t use online as an opportunity to say it. It is this sense of bravery that people get when they are anonymous that gives the blogosphere a bad reputation.
Associate with well-mannered persons and your manners will improve. Run around with decent folk and your own decent instincts will be strengthened.
Politeness and consideration for others is like investing pennies and getting dollars back.
Manners maketh man.
Evil brings men together.
Evil draws men together.
We must as second best...take the least of the evils.
The evil of the world is made possible by nothing but the sanction you give it.
The spread of evil is the symptom of a vacuum. whenever evil wins, it is only by default: by the moral failure of those who evade the fact that there can be no compromise on basic principles.
I have discovered that all human evil comes from this, man's being unable to sit still in a room.
Men never do evil so completely and cheerfully as when they do it from a religious conviction.
We are all capable of evil thoughts, but only very rarely of evil deeds: we can all do good deeds, but very few of us can think good thoughts.
All that is necessary for the triumph of evil is that good men do nothing.
I know indeed what evil I intend to do,but stronger than all my afterthoughts is my fury,fury that brings upon mortals the greatest evils.
Every minute you are thinking of evil, you might have been thinking of good instead. Refuse to pander to a morbid interest in your own misdeeds. Pick yourself up, be sorry, shake yourself, and go on again.
Nothing is easier than to denounce the evildoer; nothing is more difficult than to understand him.
Evil is obvious only in retrospect.
Do not seek evil gains; evil gains are the equivalent of disaster.
He harms himself who does harm to another, and the evil plan is most harmful to the planner.
Often an entire city has suffered because of an evil man.
Evil deeds do not prosper; the slow man catches up with the swift.
A person may cause evil to others not only by his action but by his inaction, and in either case he is justly accountable to them for the injury.
The belief in a supernatural source of evil is not necessary; men alone are quite capable of every wickedness.
Evil to him who evil thinks. (Honi Soit Qui Mal Pense)
A scoundrel will forever be a scoundrel, no matter which coat he wears.
Whenever evil befalls us, we ought to ask ourselves, after the first suffering, how we can turn it into good. So shall we take occasion, from one bitter root, to raise perhaps many flowers.
Between two evils, I always pick the one I never tried before.
It is bitter to lose a friend to evil, before one loses him to death.
Don't let us make imaginary evils, when you know we have so many real ones to encounter.
All things may corrupt when minds are prone to evil.
No evil can happen to a good man, either in life or after death.
Every sweet has its sour; every evil its good.
Evil when we are in its power is not felt as evil but as a necessity, or even a duty.
There is nothing sadder in this world than the waste of human potential. The purpose of evolution is to raise us out of the mud, not have us grovelling in it.
Today, the theory of evolution is an accepted fact for everyone but a fundamentalist minority, whose objections are based not on reasoning but on doctrinaire adherence to religious principles.
There are an awful lot of scientists today who believe that before very long we shall have unraveled all the secrets of the universe. There will be no puzzles anymore. To me it'd be really, really tragic because I think one of the most exciting things is this feeling of mystery, feeling of awe, the feeling of looking at a little live thing and being amazed by it and how its emerged through these hundreds of years of evolution and there it is and it is perfect and why.
If we are going to teach creation science as an alternative to evolution, then we should also teach the stork theory as an alternative to biological reproduction.
The theory of evolution by cumulative natural selection is the only theory we know of that is in principle capable of explaining the existence of organized complexity.
Creationist critics often charge that evolution cannot be tested, and therefore cannot be viewed as a properly scientific subject at all. This claim is rhetorical nonsense.
My theory of evolution is that Darwin was adopted.
It is an error to imagine that evolution signifies a constant tendency to increased perfection. That process undoubtedly involves a constant remodelling of the organism in adaptation to new conditions; but it depends on the nature of those conditions whether the directions of the modifications effected shall be upward or downward.
It is only in your mind that you have to excel, at anything or everything. Of course, it would be very nice to excel at most things. Indeed, we recommend that you try and do your best. But realistically, you are entitled to do the bare minimum to get by. All your accomplishments are just a bonus, something to enjoy, not requirements. You don't have to do anything to prove that you are worthy of existing.
To enjoy the things we ought and to hate the things we ought has the greatest bearing on excellence of character.
With regard to excellence, it is not enough to know, but we must try to have and use it.
Sports serve society by providing vivid examples of excellence.
Strive for excellence, not perfection.
In every power, of which taste is the foundation, excellence is pretty fairly divided between the sexes.
The ancient Greek definition of happiness was the full use of your powers along lines of excellence.
I am careful not to confuse excellence with perfection. Excellence, I can reach for; perfection is God's business.
The secret of joy in work is contained in one word - excellence. To know how to do something well is to enjoy it.
It takes a long time to bring excellence to maturity.
The renown which riches or beauty confer is fleeting and frail; mental excellence is a splendid and lasting possession.
The sad truth is that excellence makes people nervous.
It's not enough that we do our best; sometimes we have to do what's required.
Nothing’s better than the wind to your back, the sun in front of you, and your friends beside you.
I think that anyone who comes upon a Nautilus machine suddenly will agree with me that its prototype was clearly invented at some time in history when torture was considered a reasonable alternative to diplomacy.
I believe that every human has a finite number of heart-beats. I don't intend to waste any of mine running around doing exercises.
Control's a funny thing. It comes and goes. Some days I had it, some days I didn't. It felt like every time I did something healthy, I had this in satiable need to counterbalance it by doing something unhealthy.
Worrying about gray hair when your weight's soaring out of control is like mowing your lawn while your house is on fire.
Walking isn't a lost art: one must, by some means, get to the garage.
Exercise alone provides psychological and physical benefits. However, if you also adopt a strategy that engages your mind while you exercise, you can get a whole host of psychological benefits fairly quickly.
Mach-S, the speed at which stress can't keep up, is simply forward motion. But it has to be self- propelled. Note that people in cars are still stressed.
Extreme exercise doesn’t save you from poor food choices. It can be difficult to exercise and erase away that chocolate cake or pizza pie. It doesn’t work that way.
The important message I heard about working out and what I want to share is that you create your own opportunities and your own limitations.
Whenever I’d try to talk myself out of going for a walk, and there were a few days like that, I’d take myself through a series of simple tasks so I would get up and go. 1. Get up. 2. Find your house keys. 3. Put on some shoes. 4. Grab your iPod. 5. Walk out the front door.
There is nothing so good for the inside of a man as the outside of a horse.
Dig where the gold is unless you just need some exercise.
Exercise ferments the humors, casts them into their proper channels, throws off redundancies, and helps nature in those secret distributions, without which the body cannot subsist in its vigor, nor the soul act with cheerfulness.
Running cross country is the closest man will ever get to flying.
You learn a lot about people when you play games with them.
Why do strong arms fatigue themselves with frivolous dumbbells? To dig a vineyard is worthier exercise for men.
There's no easy way out. If there were, I would have bought it. And believe me, it would be one of my favorite things!
Nothing like a lot of exercise to make you realize you'd rather be lazy and dead sooner.
Exercise is medicine. Literally. Just like a pill, it reliably changes brain function by altering the activity of key brain chemicals and hormones.
Medication isn’t the only way to correct brain abnormalities in depression. Physical exercise also brings about profound changes in the brain—changes that rival those seen with the most potent antidepressant medications.
I like weights. You know where you stand with them. Well, sometimes you're lying under them, trying not to let them crush you, but you see, you KNOW they'd crush you if they could. There's honesty.
Walking is the best possible exercise. Habituate yourself to walk very far.
We know nothing of what will happen in the future, but in the analogy of experience.
You cannot acquire experience by making experiments. You cannot create experience. You must undergo it.
Experience is not what happens to a man. It is what a man does with what happens to him.
Experience is not what happens to a man; it is what a man does with what happens to him.
Experience teaches only the teachable.
Good judgment comes from experience, and experience comes from bad judgment.
Human beings, who are almost unique in having the ability to learn from the experience of others, are also remarkable for their apparent disinclination to do so.
You gain strength, courage and confidence by every experience in which you really stop to look fear in the face. You are able to say to yourself, 'I have lived through this horror. I can take the next thing that comes along.' You must do the thing you think you cannot do.
Experience is that marvelous thing that enables you to recognize a mistake when you make it again.
Experience teaches slowly and at the cost of mistakes.
Men are wise in proportion, not to their experience, but to their capacity for experience.
Experience is the name everyone gives to their mistakes.
I have but one lamp by which my feet are guided; and that is the lamp of experience. I know way of judging the future but by the past.
By far the best proof is experience.
Experience is a hard teacher because she gives the test first, the lesson afterwards.
An expert is a person who avoids small error as he sweeps on to the grand fallacy.
Where facts are few, experts are many.
An expert is a person who has made all the mistakes that can be made in a very narrow field.
My definition of an expert in any field is a person who knows enough about what's really going on to be scared.
If the world should blow itself up, the last audible voice would be that of an expert saying it can't be done.
Always listen to experts. They'll tell you what can't be done and why. Then do it.
In the beginner's mind there are many possibilities. In the expert's mind there are few.
Believe one who has proved it. Believe an expert.
One doesn't discover new lands without consenting to lose sight of the shore for a very long time.
Equipped with his five senses, man explores the universe around him and calls this adventure Science.
No pessimist ever discovered the secret of the stars or sailed an uncharted land, or opened a new doorway for the human spirit.
In human life, art may arise from almost any activity, and once it does so, it is launched on a long road of exploration, invention, freedom to the limits of extravagance, interference to the point of frustration, finally discipline, controlling constant change and growth.
We shall not cease from exploration. And the end of all our exploring will be to arrive where we started and know the place for the first time.
I'm of the mind that even people who have limitations, if they have a curiosity, they will find a way to explore it.
Emergencies have always been necessary to progress. It was darkness which produced the lamp. It was fog that produced the compass. It was hunger that drove us to exploration. And it took a depression to teach us the real value of a job.
If the facts don't fit the theory, change the facts.
Facts do not cease to exist because they are ignored.
Where facts are few, experts are many.
Get the facts, or the facts will get you. And when you get them, get them right, or they will get you wrong.
Generally the theories we believe we call facts, and the facts we disbelieve we call theories.
Delete the adjectives and [you'll] have the facts.
Facts are facts and will not disappear on account of your likes.
Facts are stubborn things; and whatever may be our wishes, our inclinations, or the dictates of our passion, they cannot alter the state of facts and evidence.
We can have facts without thinking but we cannot have thinking without facts.
Count Hermann Keyserling once said truly that the greatest American superstition was belief in facts.
Let us take things as we find them: let us not attempt to distort them into what they are not. We cannot make facts. All our wishing cannot change them. We must use them.
Get your facts first, and then you can distort them as much as you please.
He is indebted to his memory for his jests and to his imagination for his facts.
Facts are stupid things.
The trouble with facts is that there are so many of them.
Facts have a cruel way of substituting themselves for fancies. There is nothing more remorseless, just as there is nothing more helpful, than truth.
Nobody cleared a path for themselves by giving up.
If we don't succeed, we run the risk of failure.
It is possible to fail in many ways...while to succeed is possible only in one way.
You may be disappointed if you fail, but you are doomed if you don't try.
I don't know the key to success, but the key to failure is trying to please everybody.
If at first you don't succeed, find out if the loser gets anything.
Nothing has a stronger influence psychologically on their environment and especially on their children than the unlived life of the parent.
I think you actually get a kick out of being disappointed and under-achieving, because it's easier, isn't it? Failure and unhappiness is easier because you can make a joke out of it.
Act as if it were impossible to fail.
If you're willing to fail interestingly, you tend to succeed interestingly.
Behind many acts that are thought ridiculous there lie wise and weighty motives.
It is not enough to succeed. Others must fail.
Men are born to succeed, not fail.
I can't give you a sure-fire formula for success, but I can give you a formula for failure: try to please everybody all the time.
Failure meant a stripping away of the inessential. I stopped pretending to myself that I was anything other than I was and began diverting all my energy into finishing the only work that mattered to me.
It is impossible to live without failing at something, unless you live so cautiously that you might as well not lived at all. In which case, you've failed by default.
Ultimately, we all have to decide for ourselves what constitutes failure, but the world is quite eager to give you a set of criteria if you let it.
Don't be discouraged by a failure. It can be a positive experience. Failure is, in a sense, the highway to success, inasmuch as every discovery of what is false leads us to seek earnestly after what is true, and every fresh experience points out some form of error which we shall afterwards carefully avoid.
Next to trying and winning, the best thing is trying and failing.
If you have made mistakes, even serious ones, there is always another chance for you. What we call failure is not the falling down but the staying down.
You always pass failure on the way to success.
Success isn't permanent, and failure isn't fatal.
If at first you don't succeed, failure may be your style.
We all have a few failures under our belt. It's what makes us ready for the successes.
A minute's success pays the failure of years.
Try as hard as we may for perfection, the net result of our labors is an amazing variety of imperfectness. We are surprised at our own versatility in being able to fail in so many different ways.
Success is the ability to go from one failure to another with no loss of enthusiasm.
Many of life's failures are people who did not realize how close they were to success when they gave up.
Have you heard that it was good to gain the day? I also say it is good to fall, battles are lost in the same spirit in which they are won.
Hold faithfulness and sincerity as first principles.
Faith is a cop-out. If the only way you can accept an assertion is by faith, then you are conceding that it can’t be taken on its own merits.
I always admired atheists. I think it takes a lot of faith.
If you can't have faith in what is held up to you for faith, you must find things to believe in yourself, for a life without faith in something is too narrow a space to live.
And so faith is closing your eyes and following the breath of your soul down to the bottom of life, where existence and nonexistence have merged into irrelevance. All that matters is the little part you play in the vast drama.
God, I don’t have great faith, but I can be faithful. My belief in you may be seasonal, but my faithfulness will not. I will follow in the way of Christ. I will act as though my life and the lives of others matter. I will love. I have no greater gift to offer than my life. Take it.
The universe seems wondrous to me, with or without God. It has powerful lines and uncompromising ways. Patience and time sit like sages on the planets, strong and impersonal. There is a stark beauty to all of this.
We think having faith means being convinced God exists in the same way we are convinced a chair exists. People who cannot be completely convinced of God’s existence think faith is impossible for them. Not so. People who doubt can have great faith because faith is something you do, not something you think. In fact, the greater your doubt the more heroic your faith.
Treat the other man's faith gently; it is all he has to believe with. His mind was created for his own thoughts, not yours or mine.
Faithless is he that says farewell when the road darkens.
You have to accept the plan and realize that if you slip, and you might, you can’t use that as a reason to give up or stop.
What I am actually saying is that we need to be willing to let our intuition guide us, and then be willing to follow that guidance directly and fearlessly.
To believe in God or in a guiding force because someone tells you to is the height of stupidity. We are given senses to receive our information within. With our own eyes we see, and with our own skin we feel. With our intelligence, it is intended that we understand. But each person must puzzle it out for himself or herself.
Faith is, at one and the same time, absolutely necessary and altogether impossible.
Desire, ask, believe, receive.
Whatever God's dream about man may be, it seems certain it cannot come true unless man cooperates.
If you think you can win, you can win. Faith is necessary to victory.
He wears his faith but as the fashion of his hat.
I respect faith, but doubt is what gets you an education.
Never suffer youth to be an excuse for inadequacy, nor age and fame to be an excuse for indolence.
He who pursues fame at the risk of losing his self is not a scholar.
You can't choose what you're famous for in life.
To have had fame, even very minor fame, and to have lost it, got older and maybe put on a little weight is a kind of living death.
The glory of great men should always be measured by the means they have used to acquire it.
Rather than love, than money, than fame, give me truth.
If you're holding out for universal popularity, I'm afraid you will be in this cabin for a very long time.
Living in L.A., everyone likes to mold you and change you. I don't care about fame, I don't care about being a celebrity. I know that's part of the job, but I don't feed into anyone's idea of who I should be.
How you matter is defined by the things that matter to you. You matter as much as the things that matter to you do.
The future will erase everything—there’s no level of fame or genius that allows you to transcend oblivion. The infinite future makes that kind of mattering impossible.
The voracious ambition of humans is never sated by dreams coming true, because there is always the thought that everything might be done better and again.
We are like a bunch of dogs squirting on fire hydrants. We poison the groundwater with our toxic piss, marking everything MINE in a ridiculous attempt to survive our deaths.
I could not conceive that [fans] actually wanted me to sign something. It took a long time for me to figure out (a) just say 'Thank you' and sign the thing, and (b) smile in the picture, because if you try to just half-smile you're going to look constipated.
If you're a misfit within a group of misfits, does that mean you're actually popular and normal?
Glory is fleeting, but obscurity is forever.
I think the promise of fame and what it holds to you as a child and dreaming of it is not what it is. What it is, I'm not complaining about, but it's just different than the reality you dreamed.
It's going to come true like you knew it, but it's not going to feel like you think.
I'm a bit of an abstract figure that people can project their fantasies on; it's pretty much what we all are, otherwise we wouldn't be stars, and people wouldn't be interested. But people project things on you that have nothing to do with what you really are, or they see a little something and then exaggerate it. And you can't really control that.
Famous I don't know about. It's hard to be famous and alive. I just want to play music every day and hear someone say, 'Thanks, that was great, here's some money, same time tomorrow, okay?'
Popularity? It is glory's small change.
Glory is like a circle in the water, Which never ceaseth to enlarge itself, Till by broad spreading it disperses to naught.
It is dismal coming home, when there is nobody to welcome one!
I can't think of anything to write about except families. They are a metaphor for every other part of society.
They say that blood is thicker than water. Maybe that's why we battle our own with more energy and gusto than we would ever expend on strangers.
Caregiver: that word should weigh more than others on a page, sag it down a bit and wrinkle it, because the simple-sounding job frazzles as it consumes and depletes. Not that it's only gloomy. Caregiving offers many fringe benefits, including the sheer sensory delight of nourishing and grooming, sharing, and playing. There's something uniquely fulfilling about being a lodestar, feeling so deeply needed, and it's fun finding creative ways to gladden a loved one's life. But caregiving does buttonhole you; you're stitched in one place.
We al have family disfunction. It's why we're successful, to fill that hole.
Having a baby's sweet face so close to your own, for so long a time as it takes to nurse 'em, is a great tonic for a sad soul.
Losing a baby is not a thing that you could ever get used to.
If you cannot get rid of the family skeleton, you may as well make it dance.
Happiness is having a large, loving, caring, close-knit family in another city.
Family connexions were always worth preserving, good company always worth seeking.
Call it a clan, call it a network, call it a tribe, call it a family. Whatever you call it, whoever you are, you need one.
If you ever start feeling like you have the goofiest, craziest, most dysfunctional family in the world, all you have to do is go to a state fair. Because five minutes at the fair, you'll be going, 'you know, we're alright. We are dang near royalty.'
Happy families are all alike; every unhappy family is unhappy in its own way.
A family is a unit composed not only of children but of men, women, an occasional animal, and the common cold.
No matter where you live, brothers are brothers and sisters are sisters. The bonds that keep family close are the same no matter where you are.
Family isn't about whose blood you have. It's about who you care about.
I think people that have a brother or sister don't realize how lucky they are. Sure, they fight a lot, but to know that there's always somebody there, somebody that's family.
There's never a new fashion but it's old.
A fashion is nothing but an induced epidemic.
I base my fashion taste on what doesn't itch.
Every generation laughs at the old fashions, but follows religiously the new.
I once had a sparrow alight upon my shoulder for a moment, while I was hoeing in a village garden, and I felt that I was more distinguished by that circumstance that I should have been by any epaulet I could have worn.
I'd rather look ridiculous when everybody else does than plain and sensible all by myself.
It is ever so much easier to be good if your clothes are fashionable.
A fine dress on a homely maiden is never enough of a distraction. It can convey a sense of wealth and its accompanying attractions, but it can never truly compensate for a plain face.
Appearances are not the full cloth of a woman, but they are the most readily seen.
I cannot and will not cut my conscience to fit this year's fashions.
Fashion is a form of ugliness so intolerable that we have to alter it every six months.
Fashion is something that goes in one year and out the other.
The average American can get into the kingdom of heaven much more easily than he can get into the Boulevard St. Germain.
What a deformed thief this fashion is.
There is no fate that cannot be surmounted by scorn.
To punish me for my contempt for authority, fate made me an authority myself.
If you can't change your fate, change your attitude.
Men are not prisoners of fate, but only prisoners of their own minds.
I do not believe in a fate that falls on all men however they act; but I do believe in a fate that falls on them unless they act.
I do not believe in a fate that falls on men however they act; but I do believe in a fate that falls on them unless they act.
A man's character is his fate.
The fates have given mankind a patient soul.
Talent and intelligence never yet inoculated anyone against the caprice of the fates.
Fate chooses your relations, you choose your friends.
'If it’s meant for me, it will be.' Those words are my mantra in life, and it has never let me down.
Man is his own star and the soul that can render an honest and perfect man commands all light, all influence, all fate.
That consciousness is everything and that all things begin with a thought. That we are responsible for our own fate, we reap what we sow, we get what we give, we pull in what we put out. I know these things for sure.
Maybe our mistakes are what make our fate. Without them, what would shape our lives? Perhaps, if we never veered off course, we wouldn't fall in love or have babies or be who we are.
Naming one thing after another cannot, logically, increase the chances of the new thing turning out like the old thing.
Whatever limits us, we call Fate.
Fate rules the affairs of mankind with no recognizable order. 
While the fates permit, live happily; life speeds on with hurried step, and with winged days the wheel of the headlong year is turned.
I am not an adventurer by choice but by fate.
If fate means you to lose, give him a good fight anyhow.
Men at some time are the masters of their fates: The fault, dear Brutus, is not in our stars, but in ourselves, that we are underlings.
When you have the courage to tell the truth about what you're really afraid of, fear doesn't have control over your life.
When one can hear people moving, one does not so much mind, about one's fears.
When the mind has once begun to yield to the weakness of superstition, trifles impress it with the force of conviction.
Fear is the main source of superstition, and one of the main sources of cruelty. To conquer fear is the beginning of wisdom.
Courage is fear that has said its prayers.
Remember that fear always lurks behind perfectionism. Confronting your fears and allowing yourself the right to be human can, paradoxically, make you a far happier and more productive person.
No passion so effectually robs the mind of all its powers of acting and reasoning as fear.
One need not be a chamber to be haunted; One need not be a house; The brain has corridors surpassing Material place.
It is when power is wedded to chronic fear that it becomes formidable.
You can discover what your enemy fears most by observing the means he uses to frighten you.
If you forgo your plan, you also have to forgo fear.
In life we don’t get what we want, we get in life what we are. If we want more we have to be able to be more, in order to be more you have to face rejection.
None but a coward dares to boast that he has never known fear.
Even the fear of death is nothing compared to the fear of not having lived authentically and fully.
I've grown certain that the root of all fear is that we've been forced to deny who we are.
Let the fear of danger be a spur to prevent it; he that fears not, gives advantage to the danger.
There are nights when the wolves are silent and only the moon howls.
Fear is the tax that conscience pays to guilt.
Fear plays an interesting role in our lives. How dare we let it motivate us? How dare we let it into our decision making; into our livelihoods; into our relationships? It's funny isn't it? We take a day a year to dress up, in costume and celebrate fear.
Fear sometimes stops you from doing stupid things. But it can also stop you from doing creative or exciting or experimental things. It can cloud your judgment of others, and lead to all kinds of evil. The control and understanding of our personal fears is one of the most important undertakings in our life.
A timid person is frightened before a danger, a coward during the time, and a courageous person afterward.
Let us never negotiate out of fear. But let us never fear to negotiate.
Fear not those who argue but those who dodge.
Fear is a question: What are you afraid of, and why? Just as the seed of health is in illness, because illness contains information, your fears are a treasure house of self-knowledge if you explore them.
Fear is that little darkroom where negatives are developed.
To use fear as the friend it is, we must retrain and reprogram ourselves...We must persistently and convincingly tell ourselves that the fear is here--with its gift of energy and heightened awareness--so we can do our best and learn the most in the new situation.
The fear of death is more to be dreaded than death itself.
Almost everything: all external expectations, all pride all fear of embarrassment or failure. These tings just fall away in the face of death, leaving only what is truly important. Remembering that you are going to die is the best way I know to avoid the trap of thinking you have something to lose.
Feel the fear and do it anyway.
Everyone has certain fears, certain things that one cannot abide.
Fishing is a delusion entirely surrounded by liars in old clothes.
If people concentrated on the really important things in life, there'd be a shortage of fishing poles.
Many go fishing without knowing it is fish they are after.
A fishing rod is a stick with a hook at one end and a fool at the other.
Last year I went fishing with Salvador Dali. He was using a dotted line. He caught every other fish.
There's a fine line between fishing and just standing on the shore like an idiot.
Autumn is a second spring when every leaf is a flower.
Arranging a bowl of flowers in the morning can give a sense of quiet in a crowded day - like writing a poem, or saying a prayer.
If you enjoy the fruit, pluck not the flower.
A bit of fragrance clings to the hand that gives flowers.
Gardens and flowers have a way of bringing people together, drawing them from their homes.
Nobody sees a flower - really - it is so small it takes time - we haven't time - and to see takes time, like to have a friend takes time.
A cynic is a man who, when he smells flowers, looks around for a coffin.
I hope that while so many people are out smelling the flowers, someone is taking the time to plant some.
Flowers never emit so sweet and strong a fragrance as before a storm. When a storm approaches thee, be as fragrant as a sweet-smelling flower.
Stretching his hand out to catch the stars, he forgets the flowers at his feet.
I have seen flowers come in stony places And kind things done by men with ugly faces And the gold cup won by the worst horse at the races, So I trust too.
Flowers are words even a baby can understand.
Money is a powerful aphrodisiac. But flowers work almost as well.
A morning-glory at my window satisfies me more than the metaphysics of books.
This bud of love, by summer's ripening breath, May prove a beauteous flower when next we meet.
It's amazing how pervasive food is. Every second commercial is for food. Every second TV episode takes place around a meal. In the city, you can't go ten feet without seeing or smelling a restaurant. There are 20 foot high hamburgers up on billboards. I am acutely aware of food, and its omnipresence is astounding.
Eat breakfast like a king, lunch like a prince, and dinner like a pauper.
We are indeed much more than what we eat, but what we eat can nevertheless help us to be much more than what we are.
Although I have been prevented by outward circumstances from observing a strictly vegetarian diet, I have long been an adherent to the cause in principle. Besides agreeing with the aims of vegetarianism for aesthetic and moral reasons, it is my view that a vegetarian manner of living by its purely physical effect on the human temperament would most beneficially influence the lot of mankind.
Eating is always a decision, nobody forces your hand to pick up food and put it into your mouth.
Fat is a barrier, a bellicose statement to others that, to some, justifies hostility in kind. The world says to the fat person, "Your fatness is an affront to me, so we have the right to treat you as offensively as you appear." Fat is not merely viewed as another type of tissue, but as a diagnostic sign, a personal statement, and a measure of personality. Too little fat and we see you as being antisocial, fearful and sexless. Too much fat and we see you as slothful, stupid, and sexually hung up.
Fat people, it is commonly held, should be punished because they offend our aesthetic sensibilities. They take up too much space on subways, buses, airplanes, and elevators. They consume more than they contribute to society. They become ill and need to be taken care of, or they die early and their families are left unsupported. The only way fat people can gain some acceptance and forgiveness for their crime of overeating is to at least try, or look like they are trying, to lose weight. They must never eat an ice cream cone in public, never be seen eating a normal sized portion of non-diet food!
Tomatoes and oregano make it Italian; wine and tarragon make it French. Sour cream makes it Russian; lemon and cinnamon make it Greek. Soy sauce makes it Chinese; garlic makes it good.
Tell me what you eat, and I will tell you what you are.
The moral virtues, then, are produced in us neither by nature nor against nature. Nature, indeed, prepares in us the ground for their reception, but their complete formation is the product of habit.
Health food makes me sick.
The most remarkable thing about my mother is that for thirty years she served the family nothing but leftovers. The original meal has never been found.
Subdue your appetites, my dears, and you've conquered human nature.
I no longer prepare food or drink with more than one ingredient.
Eating is really one of your indoor sports. You play three times a day, and it's well worth while to make the game as pleasant as possible.
My ability to tolerate shame, to compartmentalize it, to swallow it, increased right along with my belt size. it came with the territory of being heavy. Obese people have a lifetime of experience with shame.
The people who can most successfully lose weight and maintain a healthy life style are foodies. When it comes to healthy eating, people who know how to cook and make ingredients taste good have a distinct advantage over those who can't.
He who comes first, eats first. [Familiar as: First come first served.]
Bear in mind that you should conduct yourself in life as at a feast.
Preach not to others what they should eat, but eat as becomes you, and be silent.
I have never cared much for fish - it floats in the belly as much as in the pond.
If the divine creator has taken pains to give us delicious and exquisite things to eat, the least we can do is prepare them well and serve them with ceremony.
Food is an important part of a balanced diet.
My favorite animal is steak.
Music with dinner is an insult both to the cook and the violinist.
Just as animal research tells us that gluttony and sloth are side effects of a drive to accumulate body fat, it also says that eating in moderation and being physically active (literally, having the energy to exercise) are not evidence of moral rectitude. Rather, they're the metabolic benefits of a body that's programmed to remain lean.
We don't get fat because we overeat; we overeat because we're getting fat.
Good food ends with good talk.
There is no love sincerer than the love of food.
What some call health, if purchased by perpetual anxiety about diet, isn't much better than tedious disease.
Forgive many things in others; nothing in yourself.
Anger makes you smaller, while forgiveness forces you to grow beyond what you were.
If you haven't forgiven yourself something, how can you forgive others?
To err is human; to forgive, infrequent.
Forgiveness does not always lead to a healed relationship. Some people are not capable of love, and it might be wise to let them go along with your anger. Wish them well, and let them go their way.
Forgiveness is the healing of wounds caused by another. You choose to let go of a past wrong and no longer be hurt by it. Forgiveness is a strong move to make, like turning your shoulders sideways to walk quickly on a crowded sidewalk. It's your move.
It really doesn't matter if the person who hurt you deserves to be forgiven. Forgiveness is a gift you give yourself. You have things to do and you want to move on.
No one forgives with more grace and love than a child.
'Tis the most tender part of love, each other to forgive.
There is no revenge so complete as forgiveness.
It makes you feel very virtuous when you forgive people, doesn't it?
Forgiveness is almost a selfish act because of its immense benefits to the one who forgives.
The hatred you're carrying is a live coal in your heart - far more damaging to yourself than to them.
The weak can never forgive. Forgiveness is the attribute of the strong.
Life is an adventure in forgiveness.
Always forgive your enemies; nothing annoys them so much.
It is easier to get forgiveness than permission.
The stupid neither forgive nor forget; the naive forgive and forget; the wise forgive but do not forget.
A woman can forgive a man for the harm he does her...but she can never forgive him for the sacrifices he makes on her account.
It is easier to forgive an enemy than to forgive a friend.
Pray you now, forget and forgive.
Calamities are of two kinds: misfortunes to ourselves, and good fortune to others.
We should manage our fortunes as we do our health - enjoy it when good, be patient when it is bad, and never apply violent remedies except in an extreme necessity.
Behind every great fortune there is a crime.
Many men can make a fortune but very few can build a family.
Fortune can, for her pleasure, fools advance,  And toss them on the wheels of Chance.
Depend not on fortune, but on conduct.
Nature magically suits a man to his fortunes, by making them the fruit of his character.
Every man is the architect of his own fortune.
Of all human ills, greatest is fortune's wayward tyranny.
Fortune does not change men, it unmasks them.
Fortune helps the brave.
Fortune favors the brave.
Henceforth I ask not good fortune. I myself am good fortune.
My definition of a free society is a society where it is safe to be unpopular.
Freedom is just Chaos, with better lighting.
Everything that is really great and inspiring is created by the individual who can labor in freedom.
The basis of a democratic state is liberty.
Because you are in control of your life. Don't ever forget that. You are what you are because of the conscious and subconscious choices you have made.
Those who would give up essential liberty to purchase a little temporary safety deserve neither liberty nor safety.
If you want to be free, there is but one way; it is to guarantee an equally full measure of liberty to all your neighbors. There is no other.
When we lose the right to be different, we lose the privilege to be free.
You can only protect your liberties in this world by protecting the other man's freedom. You can only be free if I am free.
We hold in our hands, the most precious gift of all: Freedom. The freedom to express our art. Our love. The freedom to be who we want to be. We are not going to give that freedom away and no one shall take it from us!
Only the educated are free.
In the truest sense, freedom cannot be bestowed; it must be achieved.
Liberty means responsibility. That is why most men dread it.
Some tourists think Amsterdam is a city of sin, but in truth it is a city of freedom. And in freedom, most people find sin.
The only freedom which deserves the name, is that of pursuing our own good in our own way, so long as we do not attempt to deprive others of theirs, or impede their efforts to obtain it.
The First Amendment is often inconvenient. But that is besides the point. Inconvenience does not absolve the government of its obligation to tolerate speech.
Patterning your life around other's opinions is nothing more than slavery.
While the State exists, there can be no freedom. When there is freedom there will be no State.
Liberty is not a means to a higher political end. It is itself the highest political end.
The most certain test by which we judge whether a country is really free is the amount of security for the minorities.
Nobody can give you freedom. Nobody can give you equality or justice or anything. If you're a man, you take it.
You can't separate peace from freedom because no one can be at peace unless he has his freedom.
It is by the goodness of God that in our country we have those three unspeakably precious things: freedom of speech, freedom of conscience, and the prudence never to practice either of them.
This liberty will look easy by and by when nobody dies to get it.
Self-reliance is the only road to true freedom, and being one's own person is its ultimate reward.
To know what you prefer instead of humbly saying Amen to what the world tells you you ought to prefer, is to have kept your soul alive.
People demand freedom of speech as a compensation for the freedom of thought which they seldom use.
A man's worst difficulties begin when he is able to do as he likes.
I would rather be exposed to the inconveniences attending too much liberty than to those attending too small a degree of it.
We fight not to enslave, but to set a country free, and to make room upon the earth for honest men to live in.
He who has a thousand friends has not a friend to spare,And he who has one enemy will meet him everywhere.
Misfortune shows those who are not really friends.
Without friends no one would choose to live, though he had all other goods.
A good friend can tell you what is the matter with you in a minute. He may not seem such a good friend after telling.
The meeting of two personalities is like the contact of two chemical substances: if there is any reaction, both are transformed.
Friendship make prosperity more shining and lessens adversity by dividing and sharing it.
The shifts of Fortune test the reliability of friends.
It is wise to apply the oil of refined politeness to the mechanisms of friendship.
Being friendless taught me how to be a friend. Funny how that works.
Have no friends not equal to yourself.
Do not protect yourself by a fence, but rather by your friends.
You can make more friends in two months by becoming interested in other people than you can in two years by trying to get other people interested in you.
My mother used to say that there are no strangers, only friends you haven't met yet. She's now in a maximum security twilight home in Australia.
Friends were like clothes: fine while they lasted but eventually they wore thin or you grew out of them.
You're supposed to trust friends. You have no reason to be his friend? That is part of the pleasure of friendship: trusting without absolute evidence and then being rewarded for that trust.
Never explain--your friends do not need it and your enemies will not believe you anyway.
Nothing changes your opinion of a friend so surely as success - yours or his.
Be courteous to all, but intimate with few, and let those few be well tried before you give them your confidence. True friendship is a plant of slow growth, and must undergo and withstand the shocks of adversity before it is entitled to the appellation.
Nobody sees a flower - really - it is so small it takes time - we haven't time - and to see takes time, like to have a friend takes time.
There isn’t much better in this life than finding a way to spend a few hours in conversation with people you respect and love. You have to carve this time out of your life because you aren’t really living without it.
When someone allows you to bear his burdens, you have found deep friendship.
You can forget a lot of things, but you cannot forget a woman’s name and claim to love her.
All people want is someone to listen.
Friendship is certainly the finest balm for the pangs of disappointed love.
Good company requires only birth, education, and manners, and with regard to education is not very nice. Birth and good manners are essential; but a little learning is by no means a dangerous thing in good company; on the contrary, it will do very well.
Here and there, human nature may be great in times of trial; but generally speaking, it is its weakness and not its strength that appears in a sick chamber: it is selfishness and impatience rather than generosity and fortitude, that one hears of. There is so little real friendship in the world! and unfortunately, there are so many who forget to think seriously till it is almost too late.
My idea of good company is the company of clever, well-informed people, who have a great deal of conversation; that is what I call good company.
She felt that she could so much more depend upon the sincerity of those who sometimes looked or said a careless or a hasty thing, than of those whose presence of mind never varied, whose tongue never slipped.
To flatter and follow others, without being flattered and followed in turn, is but a state of half enjoyment.
When the character of a man is not clear to you, look at his friends.
But the fact that some geniuses were laughed at does not imply that all who are laughed at are geniuses. They laughed at Columbus, they laughed at Fulton, they laughed at the Wright brothers. But they also laughed at Bozo the Clown.
Genius is of no country.
Everyone is born with genius, but most people only keep it a few minutes.
Genius may have its limitations, but stupidity is not thus handicapped.
All these words we use, anybody can be a genius now. It used to be you had to have a thought no one ever had before or you had to invent a number. Now, it's like, "Hey, I've got a cup in case we need another cup." "Dude, you're a genius!"
Genius hath electric power which earth can never tame.
There's a fine line between genius and insanity. I have erased this line.
The public is wonderfully tolerant. It forgives everything except genius.
He was a genius - that is to say, a man who does superlatively and without obvious effort something that most people cannot do by the uttermost exertion of their abilities.
Genius might be described as a supreme capacity for getting its possessors into trouble of all kinds.
There is no great genius without some touch of madness.
Mediocrity knows nothing higher than itself, but talent instantly recognizes genius.
Genius is one per cent inspiration, ninety-nine per cent perspiration.
Genius is one percent inspiration, ninety-nine percent perspiration.
Men of genius do not excel in any profession because they labor in it, but they labor in it because they excel.
You must give some time to your fellow men. Even if it's a little thing, do something for others - something for which you get no pay but the privilege of doing it.
The great art of giving consists in this: the gift should cost very little and yet be greatly coveted, so that it may be the more highly appreciated.
The excellence of a gift lies in its appropriateness rather than in its value.
A compliment is a gift, not to be thrown away carelessly, unless you want to hurt the giver.
There is no benefit in the gifts of a bad man.
One must be poor to know the luxury of giving.
Give what you have. To someone, it may be better than you dare to think.
Make all you can, save all you can, give all you can.
Generosity is giving more than you can, and pride is taking less than you need.
Do give books - religious or otherwise - for Christmas. They're never fattening, seldom sinful, and permanently personal.
You try to give away what you want yourself.
If we have the opportunity to be generous with our hearts, ourselves, we have no idea of the depth and breadth of love's reach.
If you want to see what children can do, you must stop giving them things.
What a child doesn't receive he can seldom later give.
Gifts allow us to demonstrate exactly how little we know about a person. And nothing pisses a person off more than being shoved into the wrong pigeonhole.
A gift in season is a double favor to the needy.
He doubly benefits the needy who gives quickly.
The spirit in which a thing is given determines that in which the debt is acknowledged; it's the intention, not the face-value of the gift, that's weighed.
We make a living by what we get, we make a life by what we give.
Purchase not friends by gifts; when thou ceasest to give, such will cease to love.
Rich gifts wax poor when givers prove unkind.
A goal without a plan is just a wish.
It is a paradoxical but profoundly true and important principle of life that the most likely way to reach a goal is to be aiming not at that goal itself but at some more ambitious goal beyond it.
The person who makes a success of living is the one who see his goal steadily and aims for it unswervingly. That is dedication.
The reason most people never reach their goals is that they don't define them, or ever seriously consider them as believable or achievable. Winners can tell you where they are going, what they plan to do along the way, and who will be sharing the adventure with them.
Achievable goals are the first step to self improvement.
Before you begin a thing, remind yourself that difficulties and delays quite impossible to foresee are ahead. If you could see them clearly, naturally you could do a great deal to get rid of them but you can't. You can only see one thing clearly and that is your goal. Form a mental vision of that and cling to it through thick and thin.
A successful individual typically sets his next goal somewhat but not too much above his last achievement. In this way he steadily raises his level of aspiration.
Let me tell you the secret that has led me to my goal. My strength lies solely in my tenacity.
We find no real satisfaction or happiness in life without obstacles to conquer and goals to achieve.
To will is to select a goal, determine a course of action that will bring one to that goal, and then hold to that action till the goal is reached. The key is action.
Energy is the essence of life. Every day you decide how you're going to use it by knowing what you want and what it takes to reach that goal, and by maintaining focus.
The big secret in life is that there is no big secret. Whatever your goal, you can get there if you're willing to work.
Do not turn back when you are just at the goal.
In the absence of clearly-defined goals, we become strangely loyal to performing daily trivia until ultimately we become enslaved by it. 
The goal of life is living in agreement with nature.
This only is denied to God: the power to undo the past.
At any rate, I am convinced that He [God] does not play dice.
Before God we are all equally wise - and equally foolish.
O ye of little faith, who believe that somehow the birth of Christ is dependent upon acknowledgment in a circular from OfficeMax!
Or what about the statue in California currently said to be crying bloody tears? Why worry about the alleged weeping of a plaster effigy when so many actual human beings have reason to cry?
God is not dead but alive and well and working on a much less ambitious project.
The gods too are fond of a joke.
Think of yourself as an incandescent power, illuminated and perhaps forever talked to by God and his messengers.
When you want something really bad and you close your eyes and wish for it-- God's the guy who ignores you.
All God does is watch us and kill us when we get boring. We must never, ever be boring.
You talk to God, you're religious. God talks to you, you're psychotic.
They say that God is everywhere, and yet we always think of Him as somewhat of a recluse.
Slow but sure moves the might of the gods.
Everyone ought to worship God according to his own inclinations, and not to be constrained by force.
Pray as if everything depended upon God and work as if everything depended upon man.
I could prove God statistically.
Doubting God's existence is okay and perfectly acceptable within Christianity as long as the person doubting remains obedient and committed to the Christian path.
EVERY path may lead you to God, even the weird ones. Most of us are on a journey. We’re looking for something, though we’re not always sure what that is. The way is foggy much of the time. I suggest you slow down and follow some of the side roads that appear suddenly in the mist.
I’m searching through all that has ever been hoped, in praise of what can never be known.
When someone is giving you their theology, their God words, you should listen hard and be very gentle. The time to deliver your God words is when you are asked.
The glorious gifts of the gods are not to be cast aside.
The gods, likening themselves to all kinds of strangers, go in various disguises from city to city, observing the wrongdoing and the righteousness of men.
Whoever obeys the gods, to him they particularly listen.
If there's one thing I know it's God does love a good joke.
Call on God, but row away from the rocks.
What can you say about a society that says that God is dead and Elvis is alive?
God gives every bird its food, but He does not throw it into its nest.
I want to believe in intelligent design, and hence I am suspicious of anything that seems to confirm my desire to believe.
If God lived on earth, people would break his windows.
God must become an activity in our consciousness.
The place of the father in the modern suburban family is a very small one, particularly if he plays golf.
If you watch a game, it's fun. If you play at it, it's recreation. If you work at it, it's golf.
Golf isn't a game, it's a choice that one makes with one's life.
There's something intrinsically therapeutic about choosing to spend your time in a wide, open park- like setting that non-golfers can never truly understand.
Although golf was originally restricted to wealthy, overweight Protestants, today it's open to anybody who owns hideous clothing.
It is impossible to imagine Goethe or Beethoven being good at billiards or golf.
Golf and sex are about the only things you can enjoy without being good at.
The income tax has made more liars out of the American people than golf has.
May no portent of evil be attached to the words I say.
To harken to evil conversation is the road to wickedness.. (Pravis Assuescere Sermonibus Est Via Ad Rem Ipsam)
No one gossips about other people's secret virtues.
We cannot control the evil tongues of others; but a good life enables us to disregard them.
There is so much good in the worst of us, And so much bad in the best of us, That it hardly behooves any of us To talk about the rest of us.
Facts or opinions which are to pass through the hands of so many, to be misconceived by folly in one, and ignorance in another, can hardly have much truth left.
Never tell evil of a man, if you do not know it for certainty, and if you know it for a certainty, then ask yourself, 'Why should I tell it?'
A rumor without a leg to stand on will get around some other way.
Many species reciprocate, but only humans gossip, and much of what we gossip about is the vale of other people as partners for reciprocal relationships.
Once you have listened to the gossip for some time, you will soon feel as if you know everyone, even if you have never met them.
Scandal is gossip made tedious by morality.
Have I inadvertently said some evil thing?
No sword bites so fiercly as an evil tongue.
Whoever gossips to you will gossip about you.
Live in such a way that you would not be ashamed to sell your parrot to the town gossip.
Rumor travels faster, but it don't stay put as long as truth.
The only time people dislike gossip is when you gossip about them.
Ill deeds are doubled with an evil word.
There is an important sense in which government is distinctive from administration. One is perpetual, the other is temporary and changeable. A man may be loyal to his government and yet oppose the particular principles and methods of administration.
While the people retain their virtue, and vigilance, no administration, by any extreme of wickedness or folly, can very seriously injure the government, in the short space of four years.
What we should be asking is not whether we need a big government or small government, but how we can create a smarter and better government.
When our government is spoken of as some menacing, threatening, foreign entity, it ignores the fact that in our democracy, government is us.
There is no nonsense so arrant that it cannot be made the creed of the vast majority by adequate governmental action.
For every action there is an equal and opposite government program.
Government is too big and too important to be left to the politicians.
Many people consider the things which government does for them as social progress, but they consider the things government does for others as socialism.
After two years in Washington, I often long for the realism and sincerity of Hollywood.
You know what's interesting about Washington? It's the kind of place where second-guessing has become second nature.
I believe that truth is the glue that holds government together , not only our government but civilization itself. That bond, though strained, is unbroken at home and abroad.
If the government is big enough to give you everything you want, it is big enough to take away everything you have.
In a political sense, there is one problem that currently underlies all of the others. That problem is making Government sufficiently responsive to the people. If we dont make government responsive to the people, we dont make it believable. And we must make government believable if we are to have a functioning democracy.
The American wage earner and the American housewife are a lot better economists than most economists care to admit. They know that a government big enough to give you everything you want is a government big enough to take from you everything you have.
Every decent man is ashamed of the government he lives under.
I believe that all government is evil, and that trying to improve it is largely a waste of time.
The government consists of a gang of men exactly like you and me. They have, taking one with another, no special talent for the business of government; they have only a talent for getting and holding office.
Whenever you have an efficient government you have a dictatorship.
If men were angels, no government would be necessary. If angels were to govern men, neither external nor internal controls on government would be necessary. In framing a government which is to be administered by men over men, the great difficulty lies in this: you must first enable the government to control the governed; and in the next place oblige it to control itself.
Before my term has ended, we shall have to test anew whether a nation organized and governed such as ours can endure. The outcome is by no means certain.
You will find that the State is the kind of organization which, though it does big things badly, does small things badly, too.
The mystery of government is not how Washington works but how to make it stop.
Sure there are dishonest men in local government. But there are dishonest men in national government too.
The best minds are not in government. If any were, business would hire them right away.
So they [the Government] go on in strange paradox, decided only to be undecided, resolved to be irresolute, adamant for drift, solid for fluidity, all-powerful to be impotent.
We must judge of a form of government by its general tendency, not by happy accidents.
In the long-run every Government is the exact symbol of its People, with their wisdom and unwisdom; we have to say, Like People like Government.
Any government is potentially the worst client in the world you could ever possibly want to have.
Disbelief in magic can force a poor soul into believing in government and business.
Gratitude is born in hearts that take time to count up past mercies.
Gratitude is not only the greatest of virtues, but the parent of all others.
Gratitude is merely the secret hope of further favors.
Gratitude is the most exquisite form of courtesy.
There but for the grace of God go [I].
I was thinking about the universe wanting to be noticed, and how I had to notice it as best I could. I felt that I owed a debt to the universe that only my attention could repay, and also that I owed a debt to everybody who didn’t get to be a person anymore and everyone who hadn’t gotten to be a person yet.
Gratitude can sometimes be as annoying as whininess.
It's a sign of mediocrity when you demonstrate gratitude with moderation.
Some are born great, some achieve greatness, and some hire public relations officers.
It is the nature of all greatness not to be exact.
Greatness is more than potential. It is the execution of that potential. Beyond the raw talent. You need the appropriate training. You need the discipline. You need the inspiration. You need the drive.
By constant self-discipline and self-control you can develop greatness of character.
I don't confuse greatness with perfection. To be great anyhow is the higher achievement.
There are some men who lift the age they inhabit, till all men walk on higher ground in that lifetime.
There be three things which make a nation great and prosperous: a fertile soil, busy workshops, easy conveyance for men and goods from place to place.
The price of greatness is responsibility.
Do not trust people. They are capable of greatness.
We have, I fear, confused power with greatness.
The measure of a country's greatness is its ability to retain compassion in times of crisis.
The secret of greatness is simple: do better work than any other man in your field - and keep on doing it.
Be not afraid of greatness: some men are born great, some achieve greatness and some have greatness thrust upon them.
Not greedy of filthy lucre.
Greedy eaters dig their graves with their teeth.
The chief weapon of sea pirates, however, was their capacity to astonish. Nobody else could believe, until it was too late, how heartless and greedy they were.
Seek not happiness too greedily, and be not fearful of happiness.
There is no calamity greater than lavish desires.There is no greater guilt than discontentment.And there is no greater disaster than greed.
Employment is the surest antidote to sorrow.
It is light grief that can take counsel.
Grief is the agony of an instant, the indulgence of grief the blunder of a life.
These days grief seems like walking on a frozen river; most of the time he feels safe enough, but there is always that danger he will plunge through.
Grief is Newark. It's there. Can't avoid it. The idea is to hold your nose, hope the traffic's not too bad and get on to Manhattan as quickly as possible.
Waste not fresh tears over old griefs.
The only cure for grief is action.
Even his griefs are a joy long after to one that remembers all that he wrought and endured.
Grief does not change you, it reveals you.
It seems the misfortune of one can plow a deeper furrow in the heart than the misfortune of millions.
Grief can take care of itself; but to get the full value of a joy you must have someone to divide it with.
While grief is fresh, every attempt to divert only irritates. You must wait till it be digested, and then amusement will dissipate the remains of it.
Grief teaches the steadiest minds to waver.
The greatest griefs are those we cause ourselves.
I just realized that there's going to be a lot of painful times in life, so I better learn to deal with it the right way.
What's gone and what's past help Should be past grief.
I don't believe in guilt, I believe in living on impulse as long as you never intentionally hurt another person, and don't judge people in your life. I think you should live completely free.
A guilty conscience needs no accuser.
Guilt is a rope that wears thin.
If all the world hated you and believed you wicked, while your own conscience approved of you and absolved you from guilt, you would not be without friends.
Guilt is helpful only when it keeps us acting in line with our beliefs and morals. Otherwise, it creates needless suffering.
Peace visits not the guilty mind. (Nemo Malus Felix)
Guilt is anger directed at ourselves--at what we did or did not do.
Many people weigh the guilt they will feel against the pleasure of the forbidden action they want to take.
When they call the roll in the Senate, the Senators do not know whether to answer 'Present' or 'Not guilty.'
Nothing is more wretched than the mind of a man conscious of guilt.
Glory built on selfish principles is shame and guilt.
So full of artless jealousy is guilt,It spills itself in fearing to be spilt.
Suspicion always haunts the guilty mind.
Suspicion always haunts the guilty mind; the thief doth fear each bush an officer.
Curious things, habits. People themselves never knew they had them.
Good habits result from resisting temptation.
My problem lies in reconciling my gross habits with my net income.
Habit is habit and not to be flung out of the window by any man, but coaxed downstairs a step at a time.
Habit is habit, and not to be flung out the window by man, but coaxed downstairs, a step at a time.
Nothing is stronger than habit.
The chains of habit are too weak to be felt until they are too strong to be broken.
How use doth breed a habit in a man!
Most folks are about as happy as they make up their minds to be.
The secret of happiness is to make others believe they are the cause of it.
Happiness is nothing more than good health and a bad memory.
The happiness of a man in this life does not consist in the absence but in the mastery of his passions.
A person is never happy except at the price of some ignorance.
Happiness arises in a state of peace, not of tumult.
The discovery of a new dish does more for human happiness than the discovery of a new star.
Happiness depends upon ourselves.
Happiness is that state of consciousness which proceeds from the achievement of one's values.
Do not weep; do not wax indignant. Understand.
Content makes poor men rich; discontentment makes rich men poor.
If there were in the world today any large number of people who desired their own happiness more than they desired the unhappiness of others, we could have paradise in a few years.
All I can say about life is, Oh God, enjoy it!
The pursuit of happiness is a most ridiculous phrase; if you pursue happiness you'll never find it.
Happiness is not the absence of problems, but the ability to deal with them.
Cherish all your happy moments: they make a fine cushion for old age.
This is the best kind of voyeurism, hearing joy from your neighbors.
With coarse rice to eat, with water to drink, and my bended arm for a pillow - I have still joy in the midst of these things. Riches and honors acquired by unrighteousness are to me as a floating cloud.
Sometimes it's hard to avoid the happiness of others.
He wanted to live life in such a way that if a photograph were taken at random it would be a cool photograph. Things should look right. Fun; there should be a lot of fun and no more sadness than absolutely necessary.
All sanity depends on this: that it should be a delight to feel heat strike the skin, a delight to stand upright, knowing the bones are moving easily under the flesh.
Slow down and enjoy life. It's not only the scenery you miss by going too fast - you also miss the sense of where you are going and why.
Happiness is a mystery like religion, and should never be rationalized.
A lifetime of happiness! No man alive could bear it: it would be hell on earth.
Happiness is having a large, loving, caring, close-knit family in another city.
Happiness is the only sanction of life; where happiness fails, existence remains a mad and lamentable experiment.
To be stupid, selfish, and have good health are three requirements for happiness, though if stupidity is lacking, all is lost.
Many persons have a wrong idea of what constitutes true happiness. It is not attained through self-gratification but through fidelity to a worthy purpose.
Man is the artificer of his own happiness.
If we cannot live so as to be happy, let us least live so as to deserve it.
It is better to be hated for what you are than to be loved for what you are not.
We hate some persons because we do not know them; and we will not know them because we hate them.
If you hate a person, you hate something in him that is part of yourself. What isn't part of ourselves doesn't disturb us.
Hate no one; hate their vices, not themselves.
Always remember others may hate you but those who hate you don't win unless you hate them. And then you destroy yourself.
Truth is the mother of hatred.
Why is propaganda so much more successful when it stirs up hatred than when it tries to stir up friendly feeling?
Hatred does not cease in this world by hating, but by not hating; this is an eternal truth.
No hatred is so bitter as that of near relations. 
We must remember that any oppression, any injustice, any hatred, is a wedge designed to attack our civilization.
Hatred is a very underestimated emotion.
Any time and energy you spend hating and being angry at your ex will ultimately take a toll on you without effecting any positive changes in your ex or your relationship.
The hatred you're carrying is a live coal in your heart - far more damaging to yourself than to them.
Hatred paralyzes life; love releases it. Hatred confuses life; love harmonizes it. Hatred darkens life; love illuminates it.
Where there is hatred, let me sow love. Where there is injury, pardon. Where there is doubt, faith.
The human heart is a strange vessel. Love and hatred can exist side by side.
Dangerous is wrath concealed. Hatred proclaimed doth lose its chance of wreaking vengeance.
As I see it, every day you do one of two things: build health or produce disease in yourself.
Every patient carries her or his own doctor inside.
Happiness is nothing more than good health and a bad memory.
Behind weight gain are the larger hurts and questions that have to be explored, probed, and understood before weight loss and maintenance is a possibility. It's a bigger issue than just calories in, calories out.
Big, sweeping life changes really boil down to small, everyday decisions.
Chicken exits are self-sabotage. They give you a false explanation for why you don't have something you want.
Getting enough sleep can be just as important as working out.
In order to truly give to others, you have to give to yourself first.
It gets a lot easier to deal with life's curveballs when you're not hiding under layers of fat.
Making excuses is not going to get me any closer to my goals.
Resistance is never the agent of change. You have to embrace the actions that are going to get you closer to your goal.
The only battle to win is the battle within, that place where we realize that we deserve to have and create all that we want in our lives.
There's something fundamental you have to understand about yourself before you can change your life for good.
When I was overweight and unhappy, I thought about being smaller, I thought about fitting into different clothes and feeling comfortable in any environment or social situation. But I didn't do anything about it. I was letting myself fall victim to not planning, not clarifying steps to reach my goals. Don't go on just wanting something. Start consciously planning where you want to be.
When weight loss becomes a goal in your life, eating right and exercising are just two pieces of the puzzle. Figuring out why you've put on the extra weight is the hardest part.
You have to track every single thing you eat if you want to keep posting big numbers on the scale each week.
You just have to start putting one foot in front of the other, making an effort to get healthy every day.
The refreshing pleasure from the first view of nature, after the pain of illness, and the confinement of a sick-chamber, is above the conceptions, as well as the descriptions, of those in health.
Fitness - If it came in a bottle, everybody would have a great body.
Health is not valued till sickness comes.
Be not slow to visit the sick.
I have never cared much for fish - it floats in the belly as much as in the pond.
Preserving health by too severe a rule is a worrisome malady.
It is amazing how much crisper the general experience of life becomes when your body is given a chance to develop a little strength.
What some call health, if purchased by perpetual anxiety about diet, isn't much better than tedious disease.
Health is not simply the absence of sickness.
[Water is] the only drink for a wise man.
A wise man should consider that health is the greatest of human blessings, and learn how by his own thought to derive benefit from his illnesses.
Look to your health; and if you have it, praise God and value it next to conscience; for health is the second blessing that we mortals are capable of, a blessing money can't buy.
It's no longer a question of staying healthy. It's a question of finding a sickness you like.
The whole point in bein' a hero is to do somethin' greater than yerself. It'd be easy to do it for the glory or the girls. We're bigger men than that.
Nurture your mind with great thoughts; to believe in the heroic makes heroes.
There are new words now that excuse everybody. Give me the good old days of heroes and villains. the people you can bravo or hiss. There was a truth to them that all the slick credulity of today cannot touch.
I think of a hero as someone who understands the degree of responsibility that comes with his freedom.
Everyone is necessarily the hero of his own life story.
A hero is no braver than an ordinary man, but he is braver five minutes longer.
Every hero becomes a bore at last.
Our heroes are people and people are flawed. Don't let that taint the thing you love.
The real hero is always a hero by mistake; he dreams of being an honest coward like everybody else.
America's present need is not heroics, but healing; not nostrums but normalcy; not revolution, but restoration.
Heroing is one of the shortest-lived professions there is.
We can't all be heroes because somebody has to sit on the curb and clap as they go by.
History is the witness that testifies to the passing of time; it illumines reality, vitalizes memory, provides guidance in daily life and brings us tidings of antiquity.
History is indeed little more than the register of the crimes, follies and misfortunes of mankind.
Hegel was right when he said that we learn from history that man can never learn anything from history.
Those who cannot remember the past are condemned to repeat it.
Human history becomes more and more a race between education and catastrophe.
History is more or less bunk. It's tradition. We don't want tradition. We want to live in the present and the only history that is worth a tinker's dam is the history we made today.
For four-fifths of our history, our planet was populated by pond scum.
That is the supreme value of history. The study of it is the best guarantee against repeating it.
I thought about how wonderfully strange it would be to live in a place where almost everything had been built by the dead.
History never looks like history when you are living through it.
If you write a post and put it on a blog, that's a historical document. If you change your template, then that entry looks completely different. It's the same words, but not the same meaning. This all depends on what historical questions that people will be asking and we can't know what they will want.
History is the short trudge from Adam to atom.
History is the version of past events that people have decided to agree upon.
Some people make headlines while others make history.
History will be kind to me for I intend to write it.
Want of foresight, unwillingness to act when action would be simple and effective, lack of clear thinking, confusion of counsel until the emergency comes, until self-preservation strikes its jarring gong-these are the features which constitute the endless repetition of history.
Indeed, history is nothing more than a tableau of crimes and misfortunes.
You can't find any true closeness in Hollywood, because everybody does the fake closeness so well.
Hollywood is a place where people from Iowa mistake each other for stars.
You can take all the sincerity in Hollywood, place it in the navel of a firefly and still have room enough for three caraway seeds and a producer's heart.
After two years in Washington, I often long for the realism and sincerity of Hollywood.
Hollywood is a place where they'll pay you a thousand dollars for a kiss and fifty cents for your soul.
Behind the phony tinsel of Hollywood lies the real tinsel.
In Hollywood a marriage is a success if it outlasts milk.
Hollywood is a place where they place you under contract instead of under observation.
A man's homeland is wherever he prospers.
Not going home is already like death.
Luxuries are never so comfortable as are the familiar, ordinary things of home.
A man travels the world over in search of what he needs and returns home to find it.
The most important work you and I will ever do will be within the walls of our own homes.
Life's a voyage that's homeward bound.
The weird thing about houses is that they almost always look like nothing is happening inside of them, even though they contain most of our lives.
Ya gotta live somewhere, but also you GET to live somewhere.
Mid pleasures and palaces though we may roam,  Be it ever so humble, there's no place like home.
A good home must be made, not bought.
An old house with its windows gone always makes me think of something dead with its eyes picked out.
As difficult as it is to have company within one's house, the absence of company is more so. The quiet echoing of solitary footsteps within the halls is suddenly amplified without the voices of excited guests. The clinking of plates and silver has narrowed to individual forks and spoons instead of the enchanting din of dining. The natural creaks and squeaks of the home are louder and more surprising.
My home is not a place, it is people.
A house that does not have one worn, comfy chair in it is soulless.
In everyone's heart stirs a great homesickness.
The best measure of a man's honesty isn't his income tax return. It's the zero adjust on his bathroom scale.
Where is there dignity unless there is honesty?
Maybe coming clean is the ultimate selfish act. A way to absolve yourself by hurting someone who doesn't deserve to be hurt.
Honesty is a good thing, but it is not profitable to its possessor unless it is kept under control.
The day is for honest men, the night for thieves.
I would rather be accused of breaking precedents than breaking promises.
Honesty pays, but it doesn't seem to pay enough to suit some people.
If the truth doesn't save us, what does that say about us?
Friends should always tell you the truth. But please don’t.
Honesty is the best policy - when there is money in it.
If you tell the truth you don't have to remember anything.
When in doubt, tell the truth.
Level with your child by being honest. Nobody spots a phony quicker than a child.
When something that honest is said it usually needs a few minutes of silence to dissipate.
Son, always tell the truth. Then you'll never have to remember what you said the last time.
Any fool can tell the truth, but it requires a man of some sense to know how to lie well.
Being entirely honest with oneself is a good exercise.
An honest man can feel no pleasure in the exercise of power over his fellow citizens.
There are only two ways of telling the complete truth--anonymously and posthumously.
Honesty is the best image.
Our lives improve only when we take chances - and the first and most difficult risk we can take is to be honest with ourselves.
I have always noticed that people will never laugh at anything that is not based on truth.
Every man has his fault, and honesty is his.
I thank God I am as honest as any man living that is an old man and no honester than I.
No legacy is so rich as honesty.
Though I am not naturally honest, I am so sometimes by chance.
Be not ashamed of thy virtues; honor's a good brooch to wear in a man's hat at all times.
The difference between a moral man and a man of honor is that the latter regrets a discreditable act, even when it has worked and he has not been caught.
Don't look for more honor than your learning merits.
An honor is not diminished for being shared.
Guard your honor. Let your reputation fall where it will. And outlive the bastards.
If the truth doesn't save us, what does that say about us?
Reputation is what other people know about you. Honor is what you know about yourself.
Real integrity is doing the right thing, knowing that nobody's going to know whether you did it or not.
What is left when honor is lost?
The louder he talked of his honor, the faster we counted our spoons.
Honor does not have to be defended.
Be honorable yourself if you wish to associate with honorable people.
I know how men in exile feed on dreams of hope.
He who despairs over an event is a coward, but he who holds hope for the human condition is a fool.
Until the day when God shall deign to reveal the future to man, all human wisdom is summed up in these two words,--'Wait and hope'.
Hope doesn't come from calculating whether the good news is winning out over the bad. It's simply a choice to take action.
Hope begins in the dark, the stubborn hope that if you just show up and try to do the right thing, the dawn will come. You wait and watch and work: You don't give up.
Hope is a waking dream.
We have been told we cannot do this by a chorus of cynics. They will only grow louder and more dissonant in the weeks to come. We've been asked to pause for a reality check; we've been warned against offering the people of this nation false hope. But in the unlikely story that is America, there has never been anything false about hope.
He that lives upon hope will die fasting.
While there's life, there's hope.
There are no hopeless situations; there are only men who have grown hopeless about them.
Hope is the thing with feathers That perches in the soul. And sings the tune Without the words, and never stops at all.
Do not spoil what you have by desiring what you have not; but remember that what you now have was once among the things you only hoped for.
He who has never hoped can never despair.
History is moving, and it will tend toward hope, or tend toward tragedy.
Never deprive someone of hope; it might be all they have.
Hope is only the love of life.
Even in the darkness, every color can be found. And every day of rain brings water flowing to things growing in the ground.
Young people have an almost biological destiny to be hopeful.
Hope, like the gleaming taper's light, Adorns and cheers our way; And still, as darker grows the night, Emits a brighter ray.
Take hope from the heart of man, and you make him a beast of prey.
It is difficult to say what is impossible, for the dream of yesterday is the hope of today and the reality of tomorrow.
To travel hopefully is a better thing than to arrive.
Hope is necessary in every condition.
The past is a source of knowledge, and the future is a source of hope. Love of the past implies faith in the future.
Cease, every joy, to glimmer on my mind, But leave---oh! leave the light of Hope behind.
Appetite, with an opinion of attaining, is called hope; the same, without such opinion, despair.
Never lose hope.
True hope is swift, and flies with swallow's wings; Kings it makes gods, and meaner creatures kings.
I can endure my own despair, but not another's hope.
He who speaks without modesty will find it difficult to make his words good.
The firm, the enduring, the simple, and the modest are near to virtue.
The superior man is modest in his speech, but exceeds in his actions.
Modesty is the citadel of beauty.
I have often wished I had time to cultivate modesty... But I am too busy thinking about myself.
Humility is no substitute for a good personality.
Life is a long lesson in humility.
The loss of one's dignified bearing is often sudden.
Be modest! It is the kind of pride least likely to offend.
In America, they want you to accomplish these great feats, to pull off these David Copperfield-type stunts. You want me to be great, but you don't ever want me to say I'm great?
You couldn't be that good and not know it, somewhere in your secret heart, however much you'd been abused into affecting public humility.
Modesty is a shining light; it prepares the mind to receive knowledge, and the heart for truth.
Always acknowledge a fault. This will throw those in authority off their guard and give you an opportunity to commit more.
I am no more humble than my talents require.
If I only had a little humility, I'd be perfect.
If you ever start to feel too good about yourself, they have this thing called the Internet, and you can find a lot of people there who don't like you.
It well becomes a young man to be modest.
In peace there's nothing so becomes a man as modest stillness and humility.
That is the saving grace of humor, if you fail no one is laughing at you.
Humor is the only test of gravity, and gravity of humor; for a subject which will not bear raillery is suspicious, and a jest which will not bear serious examination is false wit.
Humor is everywhere, in that there's irony in just about anything a human does.
All I need to make a comedy is a park, a policeman and a pretty girl.
Total absence of humor renders life impossible.
A joke was not a single-use item but something you brought out again and again until it fell apart in your hand like a cheap umbrella.
If you're at school and you're not that bright or good-looking or popular or whatever, and one day you say something and someone laughs, well, you sort of grab onto it, don't you? you think, well I run funny and I've got this stupid big face and big thighs and no-one fancies me, but at least I can make people laugh. And It's such a nice feeling, making someone laugh, that maybe you get a bit reliant on it. Like, if you're not funny then you're not... anything.
Humor is always based on a modicum of truth. Have you ever heard a joke about a father-in-law?
A sense of humor is part of the art of leadership, of getting along with people, of getting things done.
Humor can be dissected as a frog can, but the thing dies in the process and the innards are discouraging to any but the pure scientific mind.
Humor is by far the most significant activity of the human brain.
There's nothing like a gleam of humor to reassure you that a fellow human being is ticking inside a strange face.
The world is a tragedy to those who feel, but a comedy to those who think.
If there's one thing I know it's God does love a good joke.
The only rules comedy can tolerate are those of taste, and the only limitations those of libel.
The wit makes fun of other persons; the satirist makes fun of the world; the humorist makes fun of himself.
What's the point of havin' a rapier wit if I can't use it to stab people?
Where humor is concerned there are no standards - no one can say what is good or bad, although you can be sure that everyone will.
The best defence against misguided arrogance is a keen sense of humour.
One doesn't have a sense of humor. It has you.
Humor is our way of defending ourselves from life's absurdities by thinking absurdly about them.
Humor is the great thing, the saving thing. The minute it crops up, all our irritations and resentments slip away and a sunny spirit takes their place.
Humor is a rubber sword - it allows you to make a point without drawing blood.
Humor is just another defense against the universe.
Tragedy is when I cut my finger. Comedy is when you walk into an open sewer and die.
Comedy is simply a funny way of being serious.
Comedy is nothing more than tragedy deferred.
Wit makes its own welcome, and levels all distinctions. No dignity, no learning, no force of character, can make any stand against good wit.
Defining and analyzing humor is a pastime of humorless people.
Life is tough, and if you have the ability to laugh at it you have the ability to enjoy it.
A peculiar virtue in wildlife ethics is that the hunter ordinarily has no gallery to applaud or disapprove of his conduct. Whatever his acts, they are dictated by his own conscience, rather than by a mob of onlookers. It is difficult to exaggerate the importance of this fact.
If some animals are good at hunting and others are suitable for hunting, then the Gods must clearly smile on hunting.
No culture has yet solved the dilemma each has faced with the growth of a conscious mind: how to live a moral and compassionate existence when one is fully aware of the blood, the horror inherent in all life, when one finds darkness not only in one's own culture but within oneself... There are simply no answers to some of the great pressing questions. You continue to live them out, making your life a worthy expression of a leaning into the light.
Civilized life has altogether grown too tame, and, if it is to be stable, it must provide a harmless outlets for the impulses which our remote ancestors satisfied in hunting.
All the sounds of this valley run together into one great echo, a song that is sung by all the spirits of this valley. Only a hunter hears it.
There is a passion for hunting something deeply implanted in the human breast.
Hunting has opened the earth to me and let me sense the rhythms and hierarchies of nature.
The land comes alive through its wild creatures.
I'd rather get my brains blown out in the wild than wait in terror at the slaughterhouse.
I kill when I hunt and do not apologize for that, although I reserve the right to think about its implications. I also hunt without killing- whether by accident or design-and I do not apologize for that either. There is room in longbow country for a spectrum of tastes and attitudes, and that is as it should be.
I don't regard nature as a spectator sport.
Whenever I see a photograph of some sportsman grinning over his kill, I am always impressed by the striking moral and esthetic superiority of the dead animal to the live one.
The true trophy hunter is a self-disciplined perfectionist seeking a single animal, the ancient patriarch well past his prime that is often an outcast from his own kind... If successful, he will enshrine the trophy in a place of honor. This is a more noble and fitting end than dying on some lost and lonely ledge where the scavengers will pick his bones, and his magnificent horns will weather away and be lost forever.
Certainly there is no hunting like the hunting of man and those who have hunted armed men long enough and liked it, never really care for anything else thereafter.
When you have shot one bird flying you have shot all birds flying. They are all different and they fly in different ways but the sensation is the same and the last one is as good as the first.
When a man wants to murder a tiger he calls it sport; when a tiger wants to murder him he calls it ferocity.
There is a solitude, or perhaps a solemnity, in the few hours that precede the dawn of day which is unlike that of any others in the twenty-four, and which I cannot explain or account for. Thoughts come to me at this time that I never have at any other.
We cannot but pity the boy who has never fired a gun; he is no more humane, while his education has been sadly neglected.
When some of my friends have asked me anxiously about their boys, whether they should let them hunt, I have answered yes-- remembering that it was one of the best parts of my education-- make them hunters.
Wild animals never kill for sport. Man is the only one to whom the torture and death of his fellow creatures is amusing in itself.
The emotions that good hunters need to cultivate are love and service more than courage. The sentiments of the hunt then become translated into art.
If there is a sacred moment in the ethical pursuit of game, it is the moment you release the arrow or touch off the fatal shot.
The pleasure of the sportsman in the chase is measured by the intelligence of the game and its capacity to elude pursuit and in the labor involved in the capture.
Keep close to Nature's heart... and break clear away, once in awhile, and climb a mountain or spend a week in the woods. Wash your spirit clean. None of Nature's landscapes are ugly so long as they are wild.
One does not hunt in order to kill; on the contrary, one kills in order to have hunted...If one were to present the sportsman with the death of the animal as a gift he would refuse it. What he is after is having to win it, to conquer the surly brute through his own effort and skill with all the extras that this carries with it: the immersion in the countryside, the healthfulness of the exercise, the distraction from his job.
I never know which is worse: the sorrow when you hit the bird or the shame when you miss it.
When I was twelve, I went hunting with my father and we shot a bird. He was laying there and something struck me. Why do we call this fun to kill this creature who was as happy as I was when I woke up this morning.
It is very strange, and very melancholy, that the paucity of human pleasures should persuade us ever to call hunting one of them.
In a civilized and cultivated country, wild animals only continue to exist at all when preserved by sportsmen.
I'm an idealist. I don't know where I'm going, but I'm on my way.
Idealism is what precedes experience; cynicism is what follows.
An idealist is one who, on noticing that a rose smells better than a cabbage, concludes that it will also make better soup.
An idealist is a person who helps other people to be prosperous.
When they come downstairs from their Ivory Towers, Idealists are very apt to walk straight into the gutter.
Cynics regarded everybody as equally corrupt... Idealists regarded everybody as equally corrupt, except themselves.
He can compress the most words into the smallest ideas of any man I ever met.
The vitality of thought is in adventure. Ideas won't keep. Something must be done about them.
It is by acts and not by ideas that people live.
Ideals are like stars: you will not succeed in touching them with your hands, but like the seafaring man on the ocean desert of waters, you choose them as your guides, and following them, you reach your destiny.
There are only two kinds of scholars; those who love ideas and those who hate them.
An idea is salvation by imagination.
Everyone is a genius at least once a year. The real geniuses simply have their bright ideas closer together.
I said to myself, I have things in my head that are not like what anyone has taught me - shapes and ideas so near to me - so natural to my way of being and thinking that it hasn't occurred to me to put them down. I decided to start anew, to strip away what I had been taught.
Any man who afflicts the human race with ideas must be prepare to see them misunderstood.
To die for an idea; it is unquestionably noble. But how much nobler it would be if men died for ideas that were true!
Every composer knows the anguish and despair occasioned by forgetting ideas which one had no time to write down.
College isn't the place to go for ideas.
This is my answer to the gap between ideas and action - I will write it out.
Don't worry about people stealing an idea. If it's original, you will have to ram it down their throats.
Good ideas are not adopted automatically. They must be driven into practice with courageous patience.
So many new ideas are at first strange and horrible, though ultimately valuable that a very heavy responsibility rests upon those who would prevent their dissemination. 
Do something. If it doesn't work, do something else. No idea is too crazy.
When ideas fail, words come in very handy.
I can't understand why people are frightened of new ideas. I'm frightened of the old ones.
Ideas are like rabbits. You get a couple and learn how to handle them, and pretty soon you have a dozen.
A handsome parson is fit for nothing but ti put ideas into the young woman's heads.
Lack of money is no obstacle. Lack of an idea is an obstacle.
People laugh at me because I use big words. But if you have big ideas you have to use big words to express them, haven't you?
Man's mind, once stretched by a new idea, never regains its original dimensions.
The human mind treats a new idea the same way the body treats a strange protein; it rejects it.
All opening moves were the same, like in chess. You don't have to come up with anything new, there's no point, because you're both after the same thing anyway. The game soon finds its own way and it's only at that point that you need a strategy.
The key to every man is his thought.... He can only be reformed by showing him a new idea which commands his own.
I had a monumental idea this morning, but I didn't like it.
The best ideas are common property.
A committee is a cul-de-sac down which ideas are lured and then quietly strangled.
I believe in the forgiveness of sin and the redemption of ignorance.
Not ignorance, but ignorance of ignorance, is the death of knowledge.
A person is never happy except at the price of some ignorance.
Ignorance never settles a question.
To be conscious that you are ignorant is a great step to knowledge.
Consistency requires you to be as ignorant today as you were a year ago.
A little learning is a dangerous thing but a lot of ignorance is just as bad.
Ignorance is the night of the mind, but a night without moon and star.
Stupid is forever, ignorance can be fixed.
It is no good to try to stop knowledge from going forward. Ignorance is never better than knowledge.
Nothing is so firmly believed as that which is least known.
I have never met a man so ignorant that I couldn't learn something from him.
Ignorance gives one a large range of probabilities.
It is better to confess ignorance than provide it.
Ignorance of certain subjects is a great part of wisdom.
If knowledge can create problems, it is not through ignorance that we can solve them.
My whole career can be summed up with 'Ignorance is bliss.' When you do not know better, you do not really worry about failing.
It is impossible to make people understand their ignorance; for it requires knowledge to perceive it and therefore he that can perceive it hath it not.
Nothing is worse than active ignorance.
Ignorance and inconsideration are the two great causes of the ruin of mankind.
Beware of the man who works hard to learn something, learns it, and finds himself no wiser than before.
Against logic there is no armor like ignorance.
All you need in this life is ignorance and confidence; then success is sure.
Whenever you find that you are on the side of the majority, it is time to pause and reflect.
Nothing in all the world is more dangerous than sincere ignorance and conscientious stupidity.
We allow our ignorance to prevail upon us and make us think we can survive alone, alone in patches, alone in groups, alone in races, even alone in genders.
It's innocence when it charms us, ignorance when it doesn't.
Ignorance, the root and the stem of every evil.
Better be ignorant of a matter than half know it.
There are many things of which a wise man might wish to be ignorant.
Imagination is more important than knowledge...
Memory feeds imagination.
So you see, imagination needs moodling - long, inefficient, happy idling, dawdling and puttering.
Our imagination is the only limit to what we can hope to have in the future.
An idea is salvation by imagination.
Imagination is the beginning of creation. You imagine what you desire, you will what you imagine and at last you create what you will.
Choosing to live in narrow spaces leads to form of mental agoraphobia and that brings its own terrors. I think the willfully unimaginative see more monsters, they are often more afraid. What is more, those who choose not to empathize enable real monsters. For without ever committing an act of outright evil ourselves, we collude through our own apathy.
Imagination is not only the uniquely human capacity to envision that which is not, and, therefore, the foundation of all invention and innovation. In its arguably most transformative and relevetory capacity, it is the power that enables us to empathize with humans whose experiences we have never shared.
We do not need magic to transform our world. We carry all the power we need inside ourselves already. We have the power to imagine better.
There is nothing more dreadful than imagination without taste.
Imagination is the one weapon in the war against reality.
But the worst of imagining things is that the time comes when you have to stop and that hurts.
You cannot depend on your eyes when your imagination is out of focus.
Everything you can imagine is real.
There is only one admirable form of the imagination: the imagination that is so intense that it creates a new reality, that it makes things happen.
Skill without imagination is craftsmanship and gives us many useful objects such as wickerwork picnic baskets. Imagination without skill gives us modern art.
The average man, who does not know what to do with his life, wants another one which will last forever.
The only thing wrong with immortality is that it tends to go on forever.
If all else fails, immortality can always be assured by spectacular error.
Ten thousand fools proclaim themselves into obscurity, while one wise man forgets himself into immortality.
Seek not, my soul, the life of the immortals; but enjoy to the full the resources that are within thy reach.
The soul of man is immortal and imperishable.
Immortality. I notice that as soon as writers broach this question they begin to quote. I hate quotation. Tell me what you know.
The first condition of immortality is death.
Millions long for immortality who don't know what to do with themselves on a rainy Sunday afternoon.
Our existence is but a brief crack of light between two eternities of darkness.
I have Immortal longings in me.
I don't want to achieve immortality through my work... I want to achieve it through not dying.
Inspiration may be a form of superconsciousness, or perhaps of subconsciousness - I wouldn't know. But I am sure it is the antithesis of self- consciousness.
We should be taught not to wait for inspiration to start a thing. Action always generates inspiration. Inspiration seldom generates action.
You can't wait for inspiration. You have to go after it with a club.
Inspiration is wonderful when it happens, but the writer must develop an approach for the rest of the time... The wait is simply too long.
I decided that it was not wisdom that enabled [poets] to write their poetry, but a kind of instinct or inspiration, such as you find in seers and prophets who deliver all their sublime messages without knowing in the least what they mean.
Genius is one per cent inspiration, ninety-nine per cent perspiration.
Genius is one percent inspiration, ninety-nine percent perspiration.
If a man is offered a fact which goes against his instincts, he will scrutinize it closely, and unless the evidence is overwhelming, he will refuse to believe it. If, on the other hand, he is offered something which affords a reason for acting in accordance to his instincts, he will accept it even on the slightest evidence. The origin of myths is explained in this way.
The wise are instructed by reason; ordinary minds by experience; the stupid, by necessity; and brutes by instinct.
It is only by following your deepest instinct that you can lead a rich life, and if you let your fear of consequence prevent you from following your deepest instinct, then your life will be safe, expedient and thin.
There can be as much value in the blink of an eye as in months of rational analysis.
Truly successful decision making relies on a balance between deliberate and instinctive thinking.
Creativity comes from trust. Trust your instincts.
I decided that it was not wisdom that enabled [poets] to write their poetry, but a kind of instinct or inspiration, such as you find in seers and prophets who deliver all their sublime messages without knowing in the least what they mean.
Though the vicious can sometimes pour affliction upon the good, their power is transient and their punishment certain; and that innocence, though oppressed by injustice, shall, supported by patience, finally triumph over misfortune!
What are riches - grandeur - health itself, to the luxury of a pure conscience, the health of the soul; - and what the sufferings of poverty, disappointment, despair - to the anguish of an afflicted one!
Our character...is an omen of our destiny, and the more integrity we have and keep, the simpler and nobler that destiny is likely to be.
Integrity combined with faithfulness is a powerful force and worthy of great respect.
In silence man can most readily preserve his integrity.
Real integrity is doing the right thing, knowing that nobody's going to know whether you did it or not.
Integrity without knowledge is weak and useless, and knowledge without integrity is dangerous and dreadful.
I ran the wrong kind of business, but I did it with integrity.
Intelligence appears to be the thing that enables a man to get along without education. Education enables a man to get along without the use of his intelligence.
Great spirits have always found violent opposition from mediocrities. The latter cannot understand it when a man does not thoughtlessly submit to hereditary prejudices, but honestly and courageously uses his intelligence and fulfills the duty to express the results of his thought in clear form.
It has yet to be proven that intelligence has any survival value.
Men fear thought as they fear nothing else on earth -- more than ruin -- more even than death.... Thought is subversive and revolutionary, destructive and terrible, thought is merciless to privilege, established institutions, and comfortable habit. Thought looks into the pit of hell and is not afraid. Thought is great and swift and free, the light of the world, and the chief glory of man.
So far as I can remember, there is not one word in the Gospels in praise of intelligence.
Sometimes I think the surest sign that intelligent life exists elsewhere in the universe is that none of it has tried to contact us.
There is nobody so irritating as somebody with less intelligence and more sense than we have.
An intellectual is a man who takes more words than necessary to tell more than he knows.
The test of a first-rate intelligence is the ability to hold two opposed ideas in the mind at the same time, and still retain the ability to function.
It is not worth an intelligent man's time to be in the majority. By definition, there are already enough people to do that.
One man that has a mind and knows it can always beat ten men who haven't and don't.
Readers are plentiful; thinkers are rare.
Truly great madness cannot be achieved without significant intelligence.
There is no such thing as an underestimate of average intelligence.
The intelligence is proved not by ease of learning, but by understanding what we learn.
You don't have to be a genius when you're surrounded by morons.
An intelligence test sometimes shows a man how smart he would have been not to have taken it.
I happen to feel that the degree of a person's intelligence is directly reflected by the number of conflicting attitudes she can bring to bear on the same topic.
To repeat what others have said, requires education; to challenge it, requires brains.
The more intelligent a man is, the more originality he discovers in men. Ordinary people see no difference between men.
Beware when the great God lets loose a thinker on this planet.
The ability to focus attention on important things is a defining characteristic of intelligence.
A mind too active is no mind at all.
I not only use all the brains that I have, but all that I can borrow.
When I took office, only high energy physicists had ever heard of what is called the Worldwide Web.... Now even my cat has its own page.
I sense an insatiable demand for connectivity. Maybe all these people have discovered important uses for the Internet. Perhaps some of them feel hungry for a community that our real neighborhoods don't deliver. At least a few must wonder what the big deal is.
It shouldn't be too much of a surprise that the Internet has evolved into a force strong enough to reflect the greatest hopes and fears of those who use it. After all, it was designed to withstand nuclear war, not just the puny huffs and puffs of politicians and religious fanatics.
The Internet is like alcohol in some sense. It accentuates what you would do anyway. If you want to be a loner, you can be more alone. If you want to connect, it makes it easier to connect.
My favorite thing about the Internet is that you get to go into the private world of real creeps without having to smell them.
I think the Internet is uniquely suited to this free market idea: that everyone on the Internet that exchanges the traffic back and forth, big or small, we all need each other.
On the Internet, nobody knows you're a dog.
We've heard that a million monkeys at a million keyboards could produce the complete works of Shakespeare; now, thanks to the Internet, we know that is not true.
If you ever start to feel too good about yourself, they have this thing called the Internet, and you can find a lot of people there who don't like you.
The 'Net is a waste of time, and that's exactly what's right about it.
I don't think necessity is the mother of invention - invention, in my opinion, arises directly from idleness, possibly also from laziness. To save oneself trouble.
The best way to predict the future is to invent it.
An inventor is simply a fellow who doesn't take his education too seriously.
We are more ready to try the untried when what we do is inconsequential. Hence the fact that many inventions had their birth as toys.
Getting caught is the mother of invention.
To invent, you need a good imagination and a pile of junk.
Invention is the mother of necessity.
It is in the character of very few men to honor without envy a friend who has prospered.
Our envy of others devours us most of all.
Such is the inconsistency of real love, that it is always awake to suspicion, however unreasonable; always requiring new assurances from the object of its interest.
Do not envy a sinner; you don't know what disaster awaits him.
Jealousy is all the fun you think they had.
Moral indignation is jealousy with a halo.
It is better to be envied than pitied.
I am completely in charge of the choices I make about what I am doing to lose weight and get healthy. And you know what? We all have this power. Don’t be angry with me for something good I’ve done for myself. Be angry with yourself for not having the courage to do the same in your own life.
Papa said that I should never be jealous of another's marriage. Whatever joys I imagine them having are just my imaginings. The reality is far more complicated and vast.
Envy can be a positive motivator. Let it inspire you to work harder for what you want.
They envy the distinction I have won; let them therefore, envy my toils, my honesty, and the methods by which I gained it.
Envy is the ulcer of the soul.
O, beware, my lord, of jealousy!It is the green-eyed monster which doth mockThe meat it feeds on.
People everywhere confuse what they read in newspapers with news.
To read a newspaper is to refrain from reading something worthwhile. The first discipline of education must therefore be to refuse resolutely to feed the mind with canned chatter.
Trying to be a first-rate reporter on the average American newspaper is like trying to play Bach's 'St. Matthew's Passion' on a ukulele.
Trying to determine what is going on in the world by reading newspapers is like trying to tell the time by watching the second hand of a clock.
Literature is the art of writing something that will be read twice; journalism what will be read once.
USA Today has come out with a new survey - apparently, three out of every four people make up 75% of the population.
Editor: a person employed by a newspaper, whose business it is to separate the wheat from the chaff, and to see that the chaff is printed.
Rock journalism is people who can't write interviewing people who can't talk for people who can't read.
Journalism largely consists of saying 'Lord Jones is Dead' to people who never knew that Lord Jones was alive.
Half of the American people have never read a newspaper. Half never voted for President. One hopes it is the same half.
All successful newspapers are ceaselessly querulous and bellicose. They never defend anyone or anything if they can help it; if the job is forced on them, they tackle it by denouncing someone or something else.
A newspaper consists of just the same number of words, whether there be any news in it or not.
It's amazing that the amount of news that happens in the world every day always just exactly fits the newspaper.
Rage is the only quality which has kept me, or anybody I have ever studied, writing columns for newspapers.
You must have a room, or a certain hour or so a day, where you don't know what was in the newspapers that morning... a place where you can simply experience and bring forth what you are and what you might be.
Once a newspaper touches a story, the facts are lost forever, even to the protagonists.
But what is the difference between literature and journalism? ...Journalism is unreadable and literature is not read. That is all.
Every journalist has a novel in him, which is an excellent place for it.
Newspapermen learn to call a murderer 'an alleged murderer' and the King of England 'the alleged King of England' to avoid libel suits.
Advertisements... contain the only truths to be relied on in a newspaper.
I do not take a single newspaper, nor read one a month, and I feel myself infinitely the happier for it.
I read no newspaper now but Ritchie's, and in that chiefly the advertisements, for they contain the only truths to be relied on in a newspaper.
The man who reads nothing at all is better educated than the man who reads nothing but newspapers.
The only joy in the world is to begin.
This is the best kind of voyeurism, hearing joy from your neighbors.
Give not over thy soul to sorrow; and afflict not thyself in thy own counsel. Gladness of heart is the life of man and the joyfulness of man is length of days.
Do not judge men by mere appearances; for the light laughter that bubbles on the lip often mantles over the depths of sadness, and the serious look may be the sober veil that covers a divine peace and joy.
Short is the joy that guilty pleasure brings.
During [these] periods of relaxation after concentrated intellectual activity, the intuitive mind seems to take over and can produce the sudden clarifying insights which give so much joy and delight.
This is the true joy in life, the being used for a purpose recognized by yourself as a mighty one; the being thoroughly worn out before you are thrown on the scrap heap; the being a force of Nature instead of a feverish selfish little clod of ailments and grievances complaining that the world will not devote itself to making you happy. 
We could never learn to be brave and patient, if there were only joy in the world.
I feel like a tiny bird with a big song!
I'm always sorry when pleasant things end. Something still pleasanter may come after, but you can never be sure.
Isn't it good just to be alive on a day like this? I pity the people who aren't born yet for missing it.
It's been my experience that you can nearly always enjoy things if you make up your mind firmly that you will.
Looking forward to things is half the pleasure of them. You mayn't get the things themselves; but nothing can prevent you from having the fun of looking forward to them.
Joy is not a commodity to be hoarded and protected. It is like a muscle. It must be used daily to keep strong and vigorous. For all my hardships, I have been able to remain quite joyful, for my muscles are strong.
I've grown to realize the joy that comes from little victories is preferable to the fun that comes from ease and the pursuit of pleasure.
I cannot believe that the inscrutable universe turns on an axis of suffering; surely the strange beauty of the world must somewhere rest on pure joy!
Grief can take care of itself, but to get the full value of a joy you must have somebody to divide it with.
May your walls know joy; May every room hold laughter and every window open to great possibility.
The most profound joy has more of gravity than of gaiety in it.
Joy is prayer - Joy is strength - Joy is love - Joy is a net of love by which you can catch souls.
The joy of a spirit is the measure of its power.
I define joy as a sustained sense of well-being and internal peace - a connection to what matters.
There is an alchemy in sorrow. It can be transmuted into wisdom, which, if it does not bring joy, can yet bring happiness.
Winning is important to me, but what brings me real joy is the experience of being fully engaged in whatever I'm doing.
Joy is not in things; it is in us.
Learning to live in the present moment is part of the path of joy.
My mind to me a kingdom is, Such present joys therein I find, That it excels all other bliss.
Real joy comes not from ease or riches or from the praise of men, but from doing something worthwhile.
There is no greater joy nor greater reward than to make a fundamental difference in someone's life.
When you jump for joy, beware that no one moves the ground from beneath your feet.
I have always found that mercy bears richer fruits than strict justice.
Courage is of no value unless accompanied by justice; yet if all men became just, there would be no need for courage.
The sword of justice has no scabbard.
It is in justice that the ordering of society is centered.
Justice does not come from the outside. It comes from inner peace.
In the state of nature, indeed, all men are born equal, but they cannot continue in this equality. Society makes them lose it, and they recover it only by the protection of the laws.
Justice is the constant and perpetual will to allot to every man his due.
It is the spirit and not the form of law that keeps justice alive.
Justice is a contract of expediency, entered upon to prevent men harming or being harmed.
Military justice is to justice what military music is to music.
Liberty, equality - bad principles! The only true principle for humanity is justice; and justice to the feeble is protection and kindness.
Under a government which imprisons unjustly, the true place for a just man is also a prison.
If it were not for injustice, men would not know justice.
Many that live deserve death. And some die that deserve life. Can you give it to them? Then be not too eager to deal out death in the name of justice, fearing for your own safety. Even the wise cannot see all ends.
Gossip and reputation make sure that what comes around-a person who is cruel will find that the others are cruel hack to him, and a person who is kind will find others are kind in return. Gossip paired with reciprocity allow karma to work here on earth, not in the next life.
The greatest justice in life is that your vision and looks tend to go simultaneously.
The dead cannot cry out for justice; it is a duty of the living to do so for them.
Nobody can give you freedom. Nobody can give you equality or justice or anything. If you're a man, you take it.
Injustice anywhere is a threat to justice everywhere.
Justice requires that to lawfully constituted Authority there be given that respect and obedience which is its due; that the laws which are made shall be in wise conformity with the common good; and that, as a matter of conscience all men shall render obedience to these laws.
Justice consists not in being neutral between right and wrong, but in finding out the right and upholding it, wherever found, against the wrong.
Justice delayed, is justice denied.
No act of kindness, no matter how small, is ever wasted.
The ideals which have lighted my way, and time after time have given me new courage to face life cheerfully, have been Kindness, Beauty, and Truth. The trite subjects of human efforts, possessions, outward success, luxury have always seemed to me contemptible.
Moments of kindness and reconciliation are worth having, even if the parting has to come sooner or later.
The end result of kindness is that it draws people to you.
Ask yourself: Have you been kind today? Make kindness your daily modus operandi and change your world.
There are no thanks for a kindness, which has been delayed.
Compassion is the basis of all morality.
There is no duty more obligatory than the repayment of kindness.
Forget injuries, never forget kindnesses.
Recompense injury with justice, and recompense kindness with kindness.
To be able to practice five things everywhere under heaven constitutes perfect virtue...[They are] gravity, generosity of soul, sincerity, earnestness, and kindness.
He who confers a favor should at once forget it, if he is not to show a sordid ungenerous spirit. To remind a man of a kindness conferred and to talk of it, is little different from reproach.
Carry out a random act of kindness, with no expectation of reward, safe in the knowledge that one day someone might do the same for you.
I expect to pass through this world but once; any good thing therefore that I can do, or any kindness that I can show to any fellow creature, let me do it now; let me not defer or neglect it, for I shall not pass this way again.
Guard well within yourself that treasure, kindness. Know how to give without hesitation, how to lose without regret, how to acquire without meanness.
I have learnt silence from the talkative, toleration from the intolerant, and kindness from the unkind; yet strange, I am ungrateful to these teachers.
Sometimes when we are generous in small, barely detectable ways it can change someone else's life forever.
Beginning today, treat everyone you meet as if they were going to be dead by midnight. Extend them all the care, kindness and understanding you can muster. Your life will never be the same again.
To become acquainted with kindness one must be prepared to learn new things and feel new feelings. Kindness is more than a philosophy of the mind. It is a philosophy of the spirit.
Getting money is not all a man's business: to cultivate kindness is a valuable part of the business of life.
I have always depended on the kindness of strangers.
If you want others to be happy, practice compassion. If you want to be happy, practice compassion.
When you are kind to someone in trouble, you hope they'll remember and be kind to someone else. And it'll become like a wildfire.
Yet do I fear thy nature; It is too full o' the milk of human kindness.
Yet I do fear thy nature; it is too full o' the milk of human kindness.
That best portion of a good man's life,  His little, nameless, unremembered acts of kindness and of love.
That best portion of a good man's life, His little, nameless, unremembered acts of kindness and of love.
The best portion of a good man's life is his little, nameless, unremembered acts of kindness and of love.
If we value the pursuit of knowledge, we must be free to follow wherever that search may lead us. The free mind is no barking dog to be tethered on a ten-foot chain.
If we value the pursuit of knowledge, we must be free to follow wherever that search may lead us. The free mind is not a barking dog, to be tethered on a ten-foot chain.
Knowledge is like a garden; if it is not cultivated, it cannot be harvested.
Whoever undertakes to set himself up as a judge of Truth and Knowledge is shipwrecked by the laughter of the Gods.
Knowledge comes, but wisdom lingers.
Knowledge is essential to conquest; only according to our ignorance are we helpless. Thought creates character. Character can dominate conditions. Will creates circumstances and environment.
All men by nature desire knowledge.
Our feelings are our most genuine paths to knowledge.
It is knowledge that influences and equalizes the social condition of man; that gives to all, however different their political position, passions which are in common, and enjoyments which are universal.
The more extensive a man's knowledge of what has been done, the greater will be his power of knowing what to do.
To be conscious that you are ignorant is a great step to knowledge.
An investment in knowledge always pays the best interest.
If a man empties his purse into his head no one can take it away from him. An investment in knowledge always pays the best interest.
There is much pleasure to be gained from useless knowledge.
Wisdom is the right use of knowledge. To know is not to be wise. Many men know a great deal, and are all the greater fools for it. There is no fool so great a fool as a knowing fool. But to know how to use knowledge is to have wisdom.
Mediocre men often have the most acquired knowledge.
I am not one who was born in the possession of knowledge; I am one who is fond of antiquity, and earnest in seeking it there.
When you know a thing, to hold that you know it; and when you do not know a thing, to allow that you do not know it - this is knowledge.
Consider your origin; you were not born to live like brutes, but to follow virtue and knowledge.
Convinced myself, I seek not to convince.
It is no good to try to stop knowledge from going forward. Ignorance is never better than knowledge.
None of us is as smart as all of us.
We have an opportunity for everyone in the world to have access to all the world's information. This has never before been possible. Why is ubiquitous information so profound? It's a tremendous equalizer. Information is power.
We have come out of the time when obedience, the acceptance of discipline, intelligent courage, and resolution were most important, into that more difficult time when it is a man's duty to understand his world rather than to simply fight for it.
Knowledge is power, if you know it about the right person.
The beginning of knowledge is the discovery of something we do not understand.
A learned man is an idler who kills time with study. Beware of his false knowledge: it is more dangerous than ignorance.
We are here and it is now. Further than that all human knowledge is moonshine.
If money is your hope for independence you will never have it. the only real security that a man can have in this world is a reserve of knowledge, experience, and ability.
Abundance of knowledge does not teach men to be wise.
We have too many high sounding words, and too few actions that correspond with them.
He can compress the most words into the smallest ideas of any man I ever met.
Words calculated to catch everyone may catch no one.
Words are the physicians of the mind diseased.
Language is the source of misunderstandings.
Let thy speech be short, comprehending much in a few words.
High thoughts must have high language.
Grasp the subject, the words will follow.
Use soft words and hard arguments.
Great literature is simply charged with meaning to the utmost possible degree.
The great enemy of clear language is insincerity. When there is a gap between one's real and one's declared aims, one turns as it were instinctively to long words and exhausted idioms, like a cuttlefish spurting out ink.
A man thinks that by mouthing hard words he understands hard things.
For me, words are a form of action, capable of influencing change.
When ideas fail, words come in very handy.
Deeds, not words shall speak me.
Words ought to be a little wild for they are the assaults of thought on the unthinking.
The great thing about human language is that it prevents us from sticking to the matter at hand.
Man invented language to satisfy his deep need to complain.
We have really everything in common with America nowadays except, of course, language.
Words have a longer life than deeds.
Language exerts hidden power, like a moon on the tides.
Drawing on my fine command of the English language, I said nothing.
No one has a finer command of language than the person who keeps his mouth shut.
Do not accustom yourself to use big words for little matters.
Works of imagination should be written in very plain language; the more purely imaginative they are the more necessary it is to be plain.
Broadly speaking, the short words are the best, and the old words best of all.
Think like a wise man but communicate in the language of the people.
Speak properly, and in as few words as you can, but always plainly; for the end of speech is not ostentation, but to be understood.
I understand a fury in your words,But not the words.
My words fly up, my thoughts remain below:Words without thoughts never to heaven go.
We cannot really love anybody with whom we never laugh.
He deserves Paradise who makes his companions laugh.
We laugh a lot. That's for sure. Sure beats the alternative, doesn't it?
The more you find out about the world, the more opportunities there are to laugh at it.
Laughter gives us distance. It allows us to step back from an event, deal with it and then move on.
Total absence of humor renders life impossible.
Laughter is by definition healthy.
The most wasted of all days is one without laughter.
If you don't learn to laugh at trouble, you won't have anything to laugh at when you're old.
Laugh at yourself first, before anyone else can.
You cannot be mad at somebody who makes you laugh - it's as simple as that.
If we couldn't laugh, we would all go insane.
In this life he laughs longest who laughs last.
Man is distinguished from all other creatures by the faculty of laughter.
One doesn't have a sense of humor. It has you.
Always laugh when you can. It is cheap medicine.
The human race has one really effective weapon, and that is laughter.
He who laughs, lasts!
You don't stop laughing because you grow old. You grow old because you stop laughing.
Laughter is inner jogging.
I was irrevocably betrothed to laughter, the sound of which has always seemed to me to be the most civilized music in the world.
The most wasted day of all is that in which we have not laughed.
You can't deny laughter; when it comes, it plops down in your favorite chair and stays as long as it wants.
Beware of too much laughter, for it deadens the mind and produces oblivion.
Laughter is the closest distance between two people.
Among those whom I like or admire, I can find no common denominator, but among those whom I love, I can: all of them make me laugh.
Let me not be understood as saying that there are no bad laws, nor that grievances may not arise for the redress of which no legal provisions have been made. I mean to say no such thing. But I do mean to say that although bad laws, if they exist, should be repealed as soon as possible, still, while they continue in force, for the sake of example they should be religiously observed.
Laws alone can not secure freedom of expression; in order that every man present his views without penalty there must be spirit of tolerance in the entire population.
Good laws have their origins in bad morals.
The law, in its majestic equality, forbids the rich as well as the poor to sleep under bridges, to beg in the streets, and to steal bread.
Where you find the laws most numerous, there you will find also the greatest injustice.
Law is order in liberty, and without order liberty is social chaos.
Even when laws have been written down, they ought not always to remain unaltered.
I have gained this by philosophy: that I do without being commanded what others do only from fear of the law.
Law is mind without reason.
Law is order, and good law is good order.
When men are pure, laws are useless; when men are corrupt, laws are broken.
A law is something which must have a moral basis, so that there is an inner compelling force for every citizen to obey.
In the state of nature...all men are born equal, but they cannot continue in this equality. Society makes them lose it, and they recover it only by the protection of the law.
Law stands mute in the midst of arms.
The people's good is the highest law.
The strictest law often causes the most serious wrong.
The welfare of the people is the ultimate law. (Salus Populi Suprema Est Lex)
It is found by experience that admirable laws and right precedents among the good have their origin in the misdeeds of others.
It is the spirit and not the form of law that keeps justice alive.
Fragile as reason is and limited as law is as the institutionalised medium of reason, that's all we have between us and the tyranny of mere will and the cruelty of unbridled, undisciplined feelings.
The United States is a nation of laws: badly written and randomly enforced.
What power has law where only money rules.
The problem with any unwritten law is that you don't know where to go to erase it.
A judge is a law student who marks his own examination papers.
The trouble with fighting for human freedom is that one spends most of one's time defending scoundrels. For it is against scoundrels that oppressive laws are first aimed, and oppression must be stopped at the beginning if it is to be stopped at all.
It was the boast of Augustus that he found Rome of brick and left it of marble. But how much nobler will be the sovereign's boast when he shall have it to say that he found law... a sealed book and left it a living letter; found it the patrimony of the rich and left it the inheritance of the poor; found it the two-edged sword of craft and oppression and left it the staff of honesty and the shield of innocence.
There are not enough jails, not enough policemen, not even enough courts too enforce a law not supported by the people.
Good laws lead to the making of better ones; bad ones bring about worse.
The law is not so much carved in stone as it is written in water, flowing in and out with the tide.
Facts are stubborn things; and whatever may be our wishes, our inclinations, or the dictates of our passions, they cannot alter the state of facts and evidence.
I don't think necessity is the mother of invention - invention, in my opinion, arises directly from idleness, possibly also from laziness. To save oneself trouble.
Ambition is a poor excuse for not having sense enough to be lazy.
Idleness is not doing nothing. Idleness is being free to do anything.
Idleness and lack of occupation tend - nay are dragged - towards evil.
Failure is not the only punishment for laziness; there is also the success of others.
Laziness is nothing more than the habit of resting before you get tired.
Indolence is a delightful but distressing state; we must be doing something to be happy.
There is no pleasure in having nothing to do; the fun is in having lots to do and not doing it.
That indolent but agreeable condition of doing nothing.
I'm not sure about whether I shall go. I am the most incurably lazy devil that ever stood in shoe leather -- that is, when the fit is on me, for I can be spry enough at times.
Far from idleness being the root of all evil, it is rather the only true good.
Never be entirely idle; but either be reading, or writing, or praying or meditating or endeavoring something for the public good.
He that is busy is tempted by but one devil; he that is idle, by a legion.
Determine never to be idle...It is wonderful how much may be done if we are always doing.
What luck for rulers that men do not think.
The first duty of a leader is to make himself be loved without courting love. To be loved without 'playing up' to anyone - even to himself.
The key to being a good manager is keeping the people who hate me away from those who are still undecided.
Self-regulation will always be a challenge, but if somebody's going to be in charge, it might as well be me.
A sense of humor is part of the art of leadership, of getting along with people, of getting things done.
The crowd gives the leader new strength.
Faith in the ability of a leader is of slight service unless it be united with faith in his justice.
The question, "Who ought to be boss?" is like asking "Who ought to be the tenor in the quartet?" Obviously, the man who can sing tenor.
It is hard to look up to a leader who keeps his ear to the ground.
Leadership and learning are indispensable to each other.
Leaders make things possible. Exceptional leaders make them inevitable.
We will make them think it's their idea. That's how all great leaders fool people.
Management is nothing more than motivating other people.
An Army of lions commanded by a deer will never be an army of lions.
So much of what we call management consists in making it difficult for people to work.
A leader takes people where they want to go. A great leader takes people where they don't necessarily want to go but where they ought to be.
The history of the world is but the biography of great men.
Learning is not attained by chance, it must be sought for with ardor and attended to with diligence.
It is always safe to learn, even from our enemies; seldom safe to venture to instruct, even our friends.
Learning without thought is labor lost; thought without learning is perilous.
That is what learning is. You suddenly understand something you've understood all your life, but in a new way.
Only the curious will learn and only the resolute overcome the obstacles to learning. The quest quotient has always excited me more than the intelligence quotient.
Whoso neglects learning in his youth,Loses the past and is dead for the future.
Whoever ceases to be a student has never been a student.
The wisest mind has something yet to learn.
Much learning does not teach understanding.
Never seem more learned than the people you are with. Wear your learning like a pocket watch and keep it hidden. Do not pull it out to count the hours, but give the time when you are asked.
We learn by example and by direct experience because there are real limits to the adequacy of verbal instruction.
Anyone who stops learning is old, whether twenty or eighty. Anyone who keeps learning stays young. The greatest thing you can do is keep your mind young.
Never learn to do anything: if you don't learn, you'll always find someone else to do it for you.
What is important is to keep learning, to enjoy challenge, and to tolerate ambiguity. In the end there are no certain answers.
Whenever you are asked if you can do a job, tell 'em, 'Certainly I can!' Then get busy and find out how to do it.
Learning is not compulsory... neither is survival.
You learn more quickly under the guidance of experienced teachers. You waste a lot of time going down blind alleys if you have no one to lead you.
Abraham Lincoln and Millard Fillmore had the same title. They were both presidents of the United States, but their tenure in office and their legacy could not be more different.
Let us develop the resources of our land, call forth our powers, build up its institutions, promote all its great interests, and see whether we also, in our day and generation, may not perform something worthy to be remembered.
When you have told anyone you have left him a legacy the only decent thing to do is to die at once.
No legacy is so rich as honesty.
Liberals are very broadminded: they are always willing to give careful consideration to both sides of the same side.
I am a Conservative to preserve all that is good in our constitution, a Radical to remove all that is bad. I seek to preserve property and to respect order, and I equally decry the appeal to the passions of the many or the prejudices of the few.
The most radical revolutionary will become a conservative the day after the revolution.
The radical of one century is the conservative of the next. The radical invents the views. When he has worn them out the conservative adopts them.
When you are right you cannot be too radical; when you are wrong, you cannot be too conservative.
It only takes 20 years for a liberal to become a conservative without changing a single idea.
A liberal is a man too broadminded to take his own side in a quarrel.
I never dared to be radical when young For fear it would make me conservative when old.
A liberal is a person whose interests aren't at stake at the moment.
Liars when they speak the truth are not believed.
Sometimes the lies you tell are less frightening than the loneliness you might feel if you stopped telling them.
Lying increases the creative faculties, expands the ego, and lessens the frictions of social contacts.
Repetition does not transform a lie into a truth.
The visionary lies to himself, the liar only to others.
All men are frauds. The only difference between them is that some admit it. I myself deny it.
Hoaxes are nothing new. News media isn't hard to fool. It's fun to fool and people like to mess with people. It all goes to show you that we're not all that hard to fool. I think we should just accept that and trust people anyway.
It is always the best policy to speak the truth--unless, of course, you are an exceptionally good liar.
Being manipulative is dishonest and immature. We often end up having to make up more lies to cover for inconsistencies in our original manipulation. In addition, it sets a terrible example for our children. While it may solve your initial problem, the tangled web that grows from such dishonesty is more trouble than it’s worth.
A lie told often enough becomes the truth.
A lie can travel halfway around the world while the truth is putting on its shoes.
The history of our race, and each individual's experience, are sown thick with evidence that a truth is not hard to kill and that a lie told well is immortal.
Lies are like children: they're hard work, but it's worth it because the future depends on them.
False words are not only evil in themselves, but they infect the soul with evil.
A liar should have a good memory.
Truth is beautiful, without doubt; but so are lies.
Lies are like children. If you don't nurture them, they'll never be useful later.
Ambition drove many men to become false; to have one thought locked in the breast, another ready on the tongue.
Any fool can tell the truth, but it requires a man of some sense to know how to lie well.
The best liar is he who makes the smallest amount of lying go the longest way.
Oh what a tangled web we weave, When first we practise to deceive!
Truly, to tell lies is not honorable;but when the truth entails tremendous ruin,To speak dishonorably is pardonable.
Life isn't simple. But the beauty of it is, you can always start over. It'll get easier.
Life is indeed difficult, partly because of the real difficulties we must overcome in order to survive, and partly because of our own innate desire to always do better, to overcome new challenges, to self-actualize. Happiness is experienced largely in striving towards a goal, not in having attained things, because our nature is always to want to go on to the next endeavor.
There are two ways to slide easily through life: to believe everything or to doubt everything; both ways save us from thinking.
You're alive. Do something. The directive in life, the moral imperative was so uncomplicated. It could be expressed in single words, not complete sentences. It sounded like this: Look. Listen. Choose. Act.
The first step to getting the things you want out of life is this: Decide what you want.
Man is born to live, not to prepare for life.
Not a shred of evidence exists in favor of the idea that life is serious.
You don’t have to live your life so that your life is suitable for small talk. Life can be lived in ways that circumnavigate a myriad of colors and landscapes.
Life is a foreign language; all men mispronounce it.
Life is full of surprises and and serendipity. Being open to unexpected turns in the road is an important part of success. If you try to plan every step, you may miss those wonderful twists and turns. Just find your next adventure-do it well, enjoy it-and then, not now, think about what comes next.
In matters of self-control as we shall see again and again, speed kills. But a little friction really can save lives.
When we exercise self-control on a given occasion, we win for ourselves a little credibility we can rely on the next time around. Pretty soon we develop a reputation to ourselves that we want badly to uphold. With each test that we meet, our resolve gains momentum, fueled by the fear that we may succumb and establish a damaging precedent for our own weakness.
Life is a thing that mutates without warning, not always in enviable ways. All part of the improbable adventure of being alive, of being a brainy biped with giant dreams on a crazy blue planet.
The purpose of life is to fight maturity.
Oh, life is a glorious cycle of song, A medley of extemporanea; And love is a thing that can never go wrong; And I am Marie of Romania.
It's not true that life is one damn thing after another; it is one damn thing over and over.
Life improves slowly and goes wrong fast, and only catastrophe is clearly visible.
Life is just one damned thing after another.
Life is like one big Mardi Gras. But instead of showing your boobs, show people your brain, and if they like what they'll, you'll have more beads than you know what to do with.
Life is something that happens when you can't get to sleep.
Life is not a spectacle or feast; it is a predicament.
Life is something that everyone should try at least once.
Life is pleasant. Death is peaceful. It's the transition that's troublesome.
Life is difficult and complicated and beyond anyone's total control, and the humility to know that will enable you to survive its vicissitudes.
Life is a long lesson in humility.
He only earns his freedom and existence who daily conquers them anew.
Life is what happens to you while you're busy making other plans.
In real life, however, you don't react to what someone did; you react only to what you think she did, and the gap between action and perception is bridged by the art of impression management. If life itself is but what you deem it, then why not focus your efforts on persuading others to believe that you are a virtuous and trustworthy cooperator?
The lessons this life has planted in my heart pertain more to caring than crops, more to Golden Rule than gold, more to the proper choice than to the popular choice.
In the right light, at the right time, everything is extraordinary.
You can't have a light without a dark to stick it in.
In the beginning there was nothing. God said, 'Let there be light!' And there was light. There was still nothing, but you could see it a whole lot better.
There are two kinds of light--the glow that illuminates, and the glare that obscures.
What I give form to in daylight is only one per cent of what I have seen in darkness.
Let your light shine. Shine within you so that it can shine on someone else. Let your light shine.
Any one who has common sense will remember that the bewilderments of the eyes are of two kinds, and arise from two causes, either from coming out of the light or from going into the light, which is true of the mind's eye, quite as much as of the bodily eye; and he who remembers this when he sees any one whose vision is perplexed and weak, will not be too ready to laugh; he will first ask whether that soul of man has come out of the brighter light, and is unable to see because unaccustomed to the dark, or having turned from darkness to the day is dazzled by excess of light.
We burn daylight.
There are people who, instead of listening to what is being said to them, are already listening to what they are going to say themselves.
No man ever listened himself out of a job.
Make sure you have finished speaking before your audience has finished listening.
When people talk, listen completely. Most people never listen.
To listen closely and reply well is the highest perfection we are able to attain in the art of conversation.
Be a good listener. Your ears will never get you in trouble.
Listen. Do not have an opinion while you listen because frankly, your opinion doesn't hold much water outside of Your Universe. Just listen. Listen until their brain has been twisted like a dripping towel and what they have to say is all over the floor.
A good listener is a good talker with a sore throat.
A good listener is usually thinking about something else.
Maybe I wanted to hear it so badly that my ears betrayed my mind in order to secure my heart.
No one really listens to anyone else, and if you try it for a while you'll see why.
Everybody lies, but it doesn't matter because nobody listens.
It is the province of knowledge to speak and it is the privilege of wisdom to listen.
Know how to listen, and you will profit even from those who talk badly.
As I get older, I've learned to listen to people rather than accuse them of things.
My parents taught me how to listen to everybody before I made up my own mind. When you listen, you learn. You absorb like a sponge-and your life becomes so much better than when you are just trying to be listened to all the time.
A good listener is not only popular everywhere, but after a while he gets to know something.
Pray that your loneliness may spur you into finding something to live for, great enough to die for.
When you close your doors, and make darkness within, remember never to say that you are alone, for you are not alone; nay, God is within, and your genius is within. And what need have they of light to see what you are doing?
To be an adult is to be alone.
Disappearing can be quite the coping mechanism for those of us who fear abandonment the very most of all. If we disappear, you have to find us. You're the one who worries. We know where we are, but you can't leave me. I'm in charge and doing the leaving. Not the other way around.
People drain me, even the closest of friends, and I find loneliness to be the best state in the union to live in.
The worst loneliness is not to be comfortable with yourself.
Inside myself is a place where I live all alone and that's where you renew your springs that never dry up.
They are never alone that are accompanied with noble thoughts.
To be alone is to be different, to be different is to be alone.
No matter how lonely you get or how many birth announcements you receive, the trick is not to get frightened. There's nothing wrong with being alone.
Never pretend to a love which you do not actually feel, for love is not ours to command.
Such is the inconsistency of real love, that it is always awake to suspicion, however unreasonable; always requiring new assurances from the object of its interest.
To love deeply in one direction makes us more loving in all others.
Perhaps the feelings that we experience when we are in love represent a normal state. Being in love shows a person who he should be.
To fear love is to fear life, and those who fear life are already three parts dead.
Love is not enough. It must be the foundation, the cornerstone - but not the complete structure. It is much too pliable, too yielding.
Clarity of mind means clarity of passion, too; this is why a great and clear mind loves ardently and sees distinctly what it loves.
The meeting of two personalities is like the contact of two chemical substances: if there is any reaction, both are transformed.
Nothing takes the taste out of peanut butter quite like unrequited love.
It is the caring and sharing that count—love is not prevented by the things and the time that you haven’t shared.
There's an evolutionary imperative why we give a crap about our family and friends. And there's an evolutionary imperative why we don't give a crap about anybody else. If we loved all people indiscriminately, we couldn't function.
To love and be loved is to feel the sun from both sides.
Couples are jigsaw puzzles that hang together by touching in just enough points. They're never total fits or misfits.
There's a lot to be said for self-delusionment when it comes to matters of the heart.
Oh, life is a glorious cycle of song, A medley of extemporanea; And love is a thing that can never go wrong; And I am Marie of Romania.
One's first love is always perfect until one meets one's second love.
All love that has not friendship for its base, is like a mansion built upon sand.
Love is everything it's cracked up to be It really is worth fighting for, being brave for, risking everything for.
People are such great mysteries. Just when we think we have understood them, a wonderful new aspect shows in them.
When love is in excess it brings a man no honor nor worthiness.
There is always some madness in love. But there is also always some reason in madness.
What else is love but understanding and rejoicing in the fact that another person lives, acts, and experiences otherwise than we do ?
I believe love is primarily a choice and only sometimes a feeling. If you want to feel love, choose to love and be patient.
I don’t think anyone can DO anything that would make him worthy of love. Love is a gift and cannot be earned. It can only be given.
You can't love anyone until you understand that you can't love everyone.
They wouldn't call it falling in love if you didn't get hurt sometimes, but you just pick yourself up and move on.
Love is the triumph of imagination over intelligence.
Sometimes when you look back on a situation, you realize it wasn't all you thought it was. A beautiful girl walked into your life. You fell in love. Or did you? Maybe it was only a childish infatuation, or maybe just a brief moment of vanity.
There is no remedy for love but to love more.
Just because you love someone doesn't mean you have to be involved with them. Love is not a bandage to cover wounds.
People always call it luck when you've acted more sensibly than they have.
The only thing that overcomes hard luck is hard work.
A pound of pluck is worth a ton of luck.
We must believe in luck. For how else can we explain the success of those we don't like?
True luck consists not in holding the best of the cards at the table; luckiest is he who knows just when to rise and go home.
Luck is what you have left over after you give 100 percent.
Shallow men believe in luck. Strong men believe in cause and effect.
I'm a great believer in luck, and I find the harder I work the more I have of it.
Books may well be the only true magic.
Any sufficiently advanced technology is indistinguishable from magic.
As a scientist, I am not sure anymore that life can be reduced to a class struggle, to dialectical materialism, or any set of formulas. Life is spontaneous and it is unpredictable, it is magical. I think that we have struggled so hard with the tangible that we have forgotten the intangible.
It's not enough to create magic. You have to create a price for magic, too. You have to create rules.
Ah, music. A magic beyond all we do here!
We do not need magic to transform our world. We carry all the power we need inside ourselves already. We have the power to imagine better.
Formerly, when religion was strong and science weak, men mistook magic for medicine; now, when science is strong and religion weak, men mistake medicine for magic.
Disbelief in magic can force a poor soul into believing in government and business.
Every man has three characters-that which he exhibits, that which he has, and that which he thinks he has.
So long as we live among men, let us cherish humanity.
One man with courage makes a majority.
To deny our own impulses is to deny the very thing that makes us human.
It has been said that man is a rational animal. All my life I have been searching for evidence which could support this.
I have discovered that all human evil comes from this, man's being unable to sit still in a room.
Our notion of symmetry is derived from the human face. Hence, we demand symmetry horizontally and in breath only, not vertically nor in depth.
It is vain to say human beings might be satisfied with tranquillity; they must have action, and they will make it if they can not find it.
What mattered was not what happens to you, but how you handle it. Self-command is required to overcome the dangerous misinformation of our emotions, and because for the most part the self is the only thing that we can command. We have no control, ultimately, over what people do or think. What we can influence is our understanding of these circumstances and how we respond to them.
What others think of us would be of little moment did it not, when known, so deeply tinge what we think of ourselves.
The fates have given mankind a patient soul.
From such crooked wood as that which man is made of, nothing straight can be fashioned.
I hate mankind, for I think myself one of the best of them, and I know how bad I am.
You must not lose faith in humanity. Humanity is an ocean; if a few drops of the ocean are dirty, the ocean does not become dirty.
It was enough to make a body ashamed of the human race.
Man is the Only Animal that Blushes. Or needs to.
A curious part of the human psyche is that the moment that a person presumed to be in danger is discovered to be safe, everyone's anxiety turns into anger.
His passions make man live, his wisdom merely makes him last.
People are governed by the head; a kind heart is of little value in chess.
I think that God in creating Man somewhat overestimated his ability.
Man is the only animal that laughs and has a state legislature.
As I know more of mankind I expect less of them, and am ready now to call a man a good man upon easier terms than I was formerly.
A man's worst difficulties begin when he is able to do as he likes.
The world is my country, all mankind are my brethren, and to do good is my religion.
People are not an interruption of our business. People are our business.
There is no more miserable human being than one in whom nothing is habitual but indecision.
In the last analysis, my fellow country men, as we in America would be the first to claim, a people are responsible for the acts of their government.
The conception of two people living together for twenty-five years without having a cross word suggests a lack of spirit only to be admired in sheep.
A successful marriage is an edifice that must be rebuilt every day.
All married couples should learn the art of battle as they should learn the art of making love. Good battle is objective and honest - never vicious or cruel. Good battle is healthy and constructive, and brings to a marriage the principle of equal partnership.
A simple enough pleasure, surely, to have breakfast alone with one's husband, but how seldom married people in the midst of life achieve it.
I used to believe that marriage would diminish me, reduce my options. That you had to be someone less to live with someone else when, of course, you have to be someone more.
All marriages are mixed marriages.
There's only one way to have a happy marriage and as soon as I learn what it is I'll get married again.
A great marriage is not when the 'perfect couple' comes together. It is when an imperfect couple learns to enjoy their differences.
Though we marry as adults, we don't marry adults. We marry children who have grown up and still rejoice in being children, especially if we're creative.
Marriage. It's like a cultural hand-rail. It links folks to the past and guides them to the future.
I wonder, among all the tangles of this mortal coil, which one contains tighter knots to undo, and consequently suggests more tugging, and pain, and diversified elements of misery, than the marriage tie.
What is right for one couple is wrong for another. I would say that there are many more important factors to a happy marriage.
When a man is ready to marry, he is often not too particular about the lady.
Man's best possession is a sympathetic wife.
Never say that marriage has more of joy than pain.
One man's folly is another man's wife.
Nearly all marriages, even happy ones, are mistakes: in the sense that almost certainly (in a more perfect world, or even with a little more care in this very imperfect one) both partners might be found more suitable mates. But the real soul-mate is the one you are actually married to.
I pay very little regard...to what any young person says on the subject of marriage. If they profess a disinclination for it, I only set it down that they have not yet seen the right person.
I would rather have young people settle on a small income at once, and have to struggle with a few difficulties together, than be involved in a long engagement.
Knowing their feelings as she did, it was a most attractive picture of happiness to her. She always watched them as long as she could, delighted to fancy she understood what they might be talking of, as they walked along in happy independence, or equally delighted to see the Admiral's hearty shake of the hand when he encountered an old friend, and observe their eagerness of conversation when occasionally forming into a little knot of the navy, Mrs Croft looking as intelligent and keen as any of the officers around her.
The only time I ever really suffered in body or mind, the only time that I ever fancied myself unwell, or had any ideas of danger, was the winter that I passed by myself. As long as we could be together, nothing ever ailed me, and I never met with the smallest inconvenience.
When any two young people take it into their heads to marry, they are pretty sure by perseverance to carry their point, be they ever so poor, or ever so imprudent, or ever so little likely to be necessary to each other's ultimate comfort.
My marriage had its ups and downs like anyone's, but when it came down to it, I knew it was solid. I miss that sort of security, and that sort of connection with someone.
Intimacy is what makes a marriage, not a ceremony, not a piece of paper from the state.
Ain't never seen a ski trip fix a marriage.
Papa said that I should never be jealous of another's marriage. Whatever joys I imagine them having are just my imaginings. The reality is far more complicated and vast.
If there was strife and contention in the home, very little else in life could compensate for it.
Marriage is a great institution, but I'm not ready for an institution yet.
Don't waste too much time trying' to be a better man, ' cause you ain't never gonna be one without a good woman.
Always get married early in the morning. That way, if it doesn't work out, you haven't wasted a whole day.
As far as the laws of mathematics refer to reality, they are not certain; and as far as they are certain, they do not refer to reality.
Do not worry about your difficulties in Mathematics. I can assure you mine are still greater.
Mathematics may be defined as the subject in which we never know what we are talking about, nor whether what we are saying is true.
Mathematics, rightly viewed, possesses not only truth, but supreme beauty - a beauty cold and austere, like that of sculpture.
Mathematics is the queen of the sciences.
I went off to college planning to major in math or philosophy-- of course, both those ideas are really the same idea.
In mathematics you don't understand things. You just get used to them.
I have hardly ever known a mathematician who was capable of reasoning.
Proof is the idol before whom the pure mathematician tortures himself.
The mathematics is not there till we put it there.
We used to think that if we knew one, we knew two, because one and one are two. We are finding that we must learn a great deal more about 'and'.
If scientific reasoning were limited to the logical processes of arithmetic, we should not get very far in our understanding of the physical world. One might as well attempt to grasp the game of poker entirely by the use of the mathematics of probability.
What I look forward to is continued immaturity followed by death.
The purpose of life is to fight maturity.
There's no point in being grown up if you can't be childish sometimes.
By the time I'd grown up, I naturally supposed that I'd be grown up.
To be mature means to face, and not evade, every fresh crisis that comes.
Every human being on this earth is born with a tragedy, and it isn't original sin. He's born with the tragedy that he has to grow up. That he has to leave the nest, the security, and go out to do battle. He has to lose everything that is lovely and fight for a new loveliness of his own making, and it's a tragedy. A lot of people don't have the courage to do it.
I thought being an adult meant knowing what you believe, but that has not been my experience.
Maturity is only a short break in adolescence.
My Father taught me how to be a man – and not by instilling in me a sense of machismo or an agenda of dominance. He taught me that a real man doesn’t take, he gives; he doesn’t use force, he uses logic; doesn’t play the role of trouble-maker, but rather, trouble-shooter; and most importantly, a real man is defined by what’s in his heart, not his pants.
That's the worst of growing up, and I'm beginning to realize it. The things you wanted so much when you were a child don't seem half so wonderful to you when you get them.
Age is no guarantee of maturity.
Adulthood isn't an award they'll give you for being a good child. You can waste... years, trying to get someone to give that respect to you, as though it were a sort of promotion or raise in pay. If only you do enough, if only you are good enough. No. You have to just... take it. Give it to yourself, I suppose. Say, I'm sorry you feel like that and walk away. But that's hard.
When we were children, we used to think that when we were grown-up we would no longer be vulnerable. But to grow up is to accept vulnerability... To be alive is to be vulnerable.
The grass is always greener once you don't have to mow a lawn anymore.
One has a greater sense of intellectual degradation after an interview with a doctor than from any human experience.
Let's not kid ourselves. Whatever we diagnose, most patients, if they don't die, get well by themselves. Our job is mainly to try to make them feel better; do no harm.
Half of the modern drugs could well be thrown out of the window, except that the birds might eat them.
The cure for anything is salt water... tears, sweat or the sea.
Don't live in a town where there are no doctors.
That’s the thing about pain, it demands to be felt.
[Medicine is] a collection of uncertain prescriptions the results of which, taken collectively, are more fatal than useful to mankind.
Orthodox medicine has not found an answer to your complaint. However, luckily for you, I happen to be a quack.
One of the first duties of the physician is to educate the masses not to take medicine.
The desire to take medicine is perhaps the greatest feature which distinguishes man from animals.
Formerly, when religion was strong and science weak, men mistook magic for medicine; now, when science is strong and religion weak, men mistake medicine for magic.
The art of medicine consists in amusing the patient while nature cures the disease.
[Memory is] a man's real possession...In nothing else is he rich, in nothing else is he poor.
Own only what you can carry with you; know language, know countries, know people. Let your memory be your travel bag.
Memory feeds imagination.
The memory should be specially taxed in youth, since it is then that it is strongest and most tenacious. But in choosing the things that should be committed to memory the utmost care and forethought must be exercised; as lessons well learnt in youth are never forgotten.
Creditors have better memories than debtors.
The palest ink is better than the best memory.
We can remember minutely and precisely only the things which never really happened to us.
Why is it that our memory is good enough to retain the least triviality that happens to us, and yet not good enough to recollect how often we have told it to the same person?
One must have a good memory to be able to keep the promises one makes.
The advantage of a bad memory is that one enjoys several times the same good things for the first time.
There is not any memory with less satisfaction than the memory of some temptation we resisted.
If any one faculty of our nature may be called more wonderful than the rest, I do think it is memory. There seems something more speakingly incomprehensible in the powers, the failures, the inequalities of memory, than in any other of our intelligences. The memory is sometimes so retentive, so serviceable, so obedient; at others, so bewildered and so weak; and at others again, so tyrannic, so beyond control! We are, to be sure, a miracle every way; but our powers of recollecting and of forgetting do seem peculiarly past finding out.
You don’t remember what happened. What you remember becomes what happened.
Nothing is so admirable in politics as a short memory.
It's a poor sort of memory that only works backward.
When I was younger, I could remember anything, whether it had happened or not.
He who is not very strong in memory should not meddle with lying.
Nothing fixes a thing so intensely in the memory as the wish to forget it.
It was one of those perfect English autumnal days which occur more frequently in memory than in life.
You can fall ill with just a memory.
For the sense of smell, almost more than any other, has the power to recall memories and it is a pity that you use it so little.
Memories can be sad, but sometimes they can also save you.
The secret of a good memory is attention, and attention to a subject depends upon our interest in it. We rarely forget that which has made a deep impression on our minds.
I would forget it fain; But, O, it presses to my memory, like damned guilty deeds to a sinners mind.
Though yet of Hamlet our dear brother's death the memory be green.
When to the sessions of sweet silent thought  I summon up remembrance of things past,  I sigh the lack of many things I sought,  And with old woes new wail my dear time's waste.
When wasteful war shall statues overturn,  And broils root out the work of masonry,  Nor Mars his sword nor wars quick fire shall burn  The living record of your memory.
There can be no spirituality, no sanctity, no truth without the female sex.
I'm just a person trapped inside a woman's body.
How close the sexes sometimes come to one another. It is as much a matter of behaviour and the spere in which they move that separates the masculine part of humanity from the feminine.
Women upset everything. When you let them into your life, you find that the woman is driving at one thing and you're driving at another.
Misogynist: A man who hates women as much as women hate one another.
I hate women because they always know where things are.
I hate to hear you talking so like a fine gentleman, and as if women were all fine ladies, instead of rational creatures.
We certainly do not forget you as soon as you forget us. It is, perhaps, our fate rather than our merit. We cannot help ourselves. We live at home, quiet, confined, and our feelings prey upon us. You are forced on exertion. You have always a profession, pursuits, business of some sort or other, to take you back into the world immediately, and continual occupation and change soon weaken impressions. All the privilege I claim for my own sex (it is not a very enviable one; you need not covet it), is that of loving longest, when existence or when hope is gone.
The male is a domestic animal which, if treated with firmness, can be trained to do most things.
Funny business, a woman's career: the things you drop on the way up the ladder so you can move faster. You forget you'll need them again when you get back to being a woman. It's one career all females have in common, whether we like it or not: being a woman. Sooner or later, we've got to work at it, no matter how many other careers we've had or wanted.
For all their strength, men were sometimes like little children.
Male and female represent the two sides of the great radical dualism. But in fact they are perpetually passing into one another. Fluid hardens to solid, solid rushes to fluid. There is no wholly masculine man, no purely feminine woman.
When I think of talking, it is of course with a woman. For talking at its best being an inspiration, it wants a corresponding divine quality of receptiveness, and where will you find this but in a woman?
If women are expected to do the same work as men, we must teach them the same things.
When the candles are out all women are fair.
Don't accept rides from strange men, and remember that all men are strange.
Men live in a fantasy world. I know this because I am one, and I actually receive my mail there.
What is most beautiful in virile men is something feminine; what is most beautiful in feminine women is something masculine.
Women who seek to be equal with men lack ambition.
For most of history, Anonymous was a woman.
Heaven has no rage like love to hatred turned, Nor hell a fury like a woman scorned.
A woman impudent and mannish grown is not more loathed than an effeminate man in time of action.
A woman mov'd is like a fountain troubled, muddy,  ill-seeming, thick, bereft of beauty.
Age cannot wither her, nor custom stale her infinite variety.
Art thou a man? thy form cries out thou art:  Thy tears are womanish; thy wild acts denote  The unreasonable fury of a beast:  Unseemly woman in a seeming man!  Or ill-beseeming beast in seeming both!
Frailty, thy name is woman!
Give me that man that is not passion's slave, and I will wear him in my hearts core.
Have you not heard it said full oft, a woman's nay doth stand for naught.
He is the half part of a blessed man,  Left to be finished by such as she;  And she a fair divided excellence,  Whose fulness of perfection lies in him.
I have always found that mercy bears richer fruits than strict justice.
Cowards are cruel, but the brave Love mercy, and delight to save.
We shall show mercy, but we shall not ask for it.
Nothing emboldens sin so much as mercy.
Sweet mercy is nobility's true badge.
The quality of mercy is not strain'd, It droppeth as the gentle rain from heaven Upon the place beneath. It is twice blest: It blesseth him that gives and him that takes. 'T is mightiest in the mightiest: it becomes The throned monarch better than his crown; His sceptre shows the force of temporal power, The attribute to awe and majesty, Wherein doth sit the dread and fear of kings; But mercy is above this sceptred sway, It is enthroned in the hearts of kings, It is an attribute to God himself; And earthly power doth then show likest God's, When mercy seasons justice. Therefore, Jew, Though justice be thy plea, consider this, That in the course of justice none of us Should see salvation: we do pray for mercy; And that same prayer doth teach us all to render The deeds of mercy.
Mistakes are a part of being human. Appreciate your mistakes for what they are: precious life lessons that can only be learned the hard way. Unless it's a fatal mistake, which, at least, others can learn from.
Anyone nit-picking enough to write a letter of correction to an editor doubtless deserves the error that provoked it.
Great services are not canceled by one act or by one single error.
An expert is a person who avoids small error as he sweeps on to the grand fallacy.
Wise men profit more from fools than fools from wise men; for the wise men shun the mistakes of fools, but fools do not imitate the successes of the wise.
We must not say every mistake is a foolish one.
Be not ashamed of mistakes and thus make them crimes.
Laughing at our mistakes can lengthen our own life. Laughing at someone else's can shorten it.
We're all capable of mistakes, but I do not care to enlighten you on the mistakes we may or may not have made.
No one who cannot rejoice in the discovery of his own mistakes deserves to be called a scholar.
Assert your right to make a few mistakes. If people can't accept your imperfections, that's their fault.
The greatest mistake you can make in life is to be continually afraid you will make one.
The greatest mistake you can make in life is to be continually fearing you will make one.
Experience is that marvelous thing that enables you to recognize a mistake when you make it again.
It's always helpful to learn from your mistakes because then your mistakes seem worthwhile.
A life spent making mistakes is not only more honorable, but more useful than a life spent doing nothing.
While one person hesitates because he feels inferior, the other is busy making mistakes and becoming superior.
She had an unequalled gift... of squeezing big mistakes into small opportunities. 
When you make a mistake, don't look back at it long. Take the reason of the thing into your mind and then look forward. Mistakes are lessons of wisdom. The past cannot be changed. The future is yet in your power.
I have learned throughout my life as a composer chiefly through my mistakes and pursuits of false assumptions, not by my exposure to founts of wisdom and knowledge.
Any man whose errors take ten years to correct is quite a man.
Experience teaches slowly and at the cost of mistakes.
Mistakes are the portals of discovery.
If all else fails, immortality can always be assured by spectacular error.
There must be a limit to the mistakes one person can make, and when I get to the end of them, then I'll be through with them. That's a very comforting thought.
Freedom is not worth having if it does not include the freedom to make mistakes.
There are sadistic scientists who hurry to hunt down errors instead of establishing the truth.
If you have made mistakes, even serious ones, there is always another chance for you. What we call failure is not the falling down but the staying down.
If I had my life to live over... I'd dare to make more mistakes next time.
Never interrupt your enemy when he is making a mistake.
Too many of us look upon Americans as dollar chasers. This is a cruel libel, even if it is reiterated thoughtlessly by the Americans themselves.
Poverty cannot deprive us of many consolations. It cannot rob us of the affection we have for each other, or degrade us in our own opinion, of in that of any person, whose opinion we ought to value.
There is some magic in wealth, which can thus make persons pay their court to it, when it does not even benefit themselves. How strange it is, that a fool or knave, with riches, should be treated with more respect by the world, than a good man, or a wise man in poverty!
I feel good about taking things to Goodwill and actually, I do like shopping at Goodwill. It's so cheap that it feels like a library where I am just checking things out for awhile until I decide to take them back.
He that is of the opinion money will do everything may well be suspected of doing everything for money.
If you would be wealthy, think of saving as well as getting.
Who is rich? He that is content. Who is that? Nobody.
Riches may enable us to confer favours, but to confer them with propriety and grace requires a something that riches cannot give.
Annual income twenty pounds, annual expenditure nineteen six, result happiness. Annual income twenty pounds, annual expenditure twenty pound ought and six, result misery.
Subdue your appetites, my dears, and you've conquered human nature.
If all the rich people in the world divided up their money among themselves there wouldn't be enough to go around.
Endless money forms the sinews of war.
Money was never a big motivation for me, except as a way to keep score. The real excitement is playing the game.
If you want to know what God thinks of money, just look at the people he gave it to.
Money is the sinew of love as well as war.
I'm living so far beyond my income that we may almost be said to be living apart.
The only way not to think about money is to have a great deal of it.
Save a little money each month and at the end of the year you'll be surprised at how little you have.
My problem lies in reconciling my gross habits with my net income.
The mint makes it first, it is up to you to make it last.
The rich are the scum of the earth in every country.
Lack of money is the root of all evil.
One must be poor to know the luxury of giving.
Money frees you from doing things you dislike. Since I dislike doing nearly everything, money is handy.
The chief value of money lies in the fact that one lives in a world in which it is overestimated.
Make money your god and it will plague you like the devil.
Make money, money by fair means if you can, if not, but any means money.
If you can count your money, you don't have a billion dollars.
I have enough money to last me the rest of my life, unless I buy something.
A large income is the best recipe for happiness I ever heard of.
No moral system can rest solely on authority.
Ethics, too, are nothing but reverence for life. That is what gives me the fundamental principle of morality, namely, that good consists in maintaining, promoting, and enhancing life, and that destroying, injuring, and limiting life are evil.
Good laws have their origins in bad morals.
Compassion is the basis of all morality.
The people who are regarded as moral luminaries are those who forego ordinary pleasures themselves and find compensation in interfering with the pleasures of others.
We have, in fact, two kinds of morality side by side: one which we preach but do not practice, and another which we practice but seldom preach.
There is no moral precept that does not have something inconvenient about it.
Morality is herd instinct in the individual.
I say that a man must be certain of his morality for the simple reason that he has to suffer for it.
An Englishman thinks he is moral when he is only uncomfortable.
The difference between a moral man and a man of honor is that the latter regrets a discreditable act, even when it has worked and he has not been caught.
Truth is the secret of eloquence and of virtue, the basis of moral authority; it is the highest summit of art and life.
Aim above morality. Be not simply good; be good for something.
Do not be too moral. You may cheat yourself out of much life. Aim above morality. Be not simply good; be good for something.
Never let your sense of morals get in the way of doing what's right.
History is a voice forever sounding across the centuries the laws of right and wrong. Opinions alter, manners change, creeds rise and fall, but the moral law is written on the tablets of eternity.
Taste is not only a part and index of morality, it is the only morality. The first, and last, and closest trial question to any living creature is "What do you like?" Tell me what you like, I'll tell you what you are.
Scandal is great entertainment because it allows people to feel contempt, a moral emotion that gives feeling of moral superiority while asking nothing in return.
The higher the buildings, the lower the morals.
Morality, like art, means drawing a line someplace.
Scandal is gossip made tedious by morality.
The ability to see beauty is the beginning of our moral sensibility. What we believe is beautiful we will not wantonly destroy.
I believe that in this generation those with the courage to enter the conflict will find themselves with companions in every corner of the world.
If your morals make you dreary, depend on it , they are wrong.
Perfection of moral virtue does not wholly take away the passions, but regulates them.
The soul is the captain and ruler of the life of morals.
'Wrong' is one of those concepts that depends on witnesses.
I have never believed there was one code of morality for a public and another for a private man.
All sects are different, because they come from men; morality is everywhere the same, because it comes from God.
Arranging a bowl of flowers in the morning can give a sense of quiet in a crowded day - like writing a poem, or saying a prayer.
I get up every morning determined to both change the world and have one hell of a good time. Sometimes this makes planning my day difficult.
I have a problem about being nearly sixty: I keep waking up in the morning and thinking I'm thirty-one.
Some mornings it just doesn't seem worth it to gnaw through the leather straps.
In a real dark night of the soul it is always three o'clock in the morning, day after day.
I feel sorry for people who do not drink. When they wake up in the morning it is as good as they are going to feel all day.
Take a two-mile walk every morning before breakfast.
Never rely on the glory of the morning nor the smiles of your mother-in-law.
The average, healthy, well-adjusted adult gets up at seven-thirty in the morning feeling just plain terrible.
On a lazy Saturday morning when you're lying in bed, drifting in and out of sleep, there is a space where fantasy and reality become one. Are you awake, or are you dreaming? You see people and things; some are familiar; some are strange. You talk, you feel, but you move without walking; you fly without wings. Your mind and your body exist, but on separate planes. Time stands still. For me, this is the feeling I have when ideas come.
In the morning, when you are sluggish about getting up, let this thought be present: 'I am rising to a man's work.'
Never face facts; if you do, you'll never get up in the morning.
My future starts when I wake up every morning... Every day I find something creative to do with my life.
I have always felt that the moment when first you wake up in the morning is the most wonderful of the twenty-four hours.
At my age the bones are water in the morning until food is given them.
The brain is a wonderful organ. It starts working the moment you get up in the morning and does not stop until you get into the office.
I had a monumental idea this morning, but I didn't like it.
What a beautiful, sunny morning. It makes you happy to be alive, doesn't it? We can't let the sun outshine us! We have to beam, too!
Early morning cheerfulness can be extremely obnoxious.
The whole problem can be stated quite simply by asking, 'Is there a meaning to music?' My answer would be, 'Yes.' And 'Can you state in so many words what the meaning is?' My answer to that would be, 'No.'
After silence, that which comes nearest to expressing the inexpressible is music.
[T]here's no bad day that can't be overcome by listening to a barbershop quartet; this is just truth, plain and simple.
An intellectual snob is someone who can listen to the William Tell Overture and not think of The Lone Ranger.
But then there's a moment like tonight, a profound and transcendent experience, the feeling as if a door has opened, and it's all because of that instrument, that incredible, magical instrument.
Opera is when a guy gets stabbed in the back and, instead of bleeding, he sings.
Wagner's music is better than it sounds.
My personal hobbies are reading, listening to music, and silence.
I don't know anything about music. In my line you don't have to.
Only sick music makes money today.
Music with dinner is an insult both to the cook and the violinist.
Hell is full of musical amateurs.
Hell is full of musical amateurs: music is the brandy of the damned.
I think I should have no other mortal wants, if I could always have plenty of music. It seems to infuse strength into my limbs and ideas into my brain. Life seems to go on without effort, when I am filled with music.
There is no feeling, except the extremes of fear and grief, that does not find relief in music.
Music is essentially useless, as life is.
Music is essentially useless, as life is: but both have an ideal extension which lends utility to its conditions.
Military justice is to justice what military music is to music.
Among all men on the earth bards have a share of honor and reverence, because the muse has taught them songs and loves the race of bards.
My music is best understood by children and animals.
Ah, music. A magic beyond all we do here!
I think everyone should have a Beatles phase in their life. I think it's part of growing up in the Western world.
Music like religion, unconditionally brings in its train all the moral virtues to the heart it enters, even though that heart is not in the least worthy.
I hate music, especially when it's played.
If you develop an ear for sounds that are musical it is like developing an ego. You begin to refuse sounds that are not musical and that way cut yourself off from a good deal of experience.
Music is the only language in which you cannot say a mean or sarcastic thing.
Classical music is the kind we keep thinking will turn into a tune.
Music is a discipline, and a mistress of order and good manners, she makes the people milder and gentler, more moral and more reasonable.
My heart, which is so full to overflowing, has often been solaced and refreshed by music when sick and weary.
Take a music bath once or twice a week for a few seasons, and you will find that it is to the soul what the water bath is to the body.
The refreshing pleasure from the first view of nature, after the pain of illness, and the confinement of a sick-chamber, is above the conceptions, as well as the descriptions, of those in health.
And then, the unspeakable purity and freshness of the air! There was just enough heat to enhance the value of the breeze, and just enough wind to keep the whole sea in motion, to make the waves come bounding to the shore, foaming and sparkling, as if wild with glee.
Our land is more valuable than your money. As long as the sun shines and the waters flow, this land will be here to give life to men and animals; therefore, we cannot sell this land. It was put here for us by the Great Spirit and we cannot sell it because it does not belong to us.
Nature is just enough; but men and women must comprehend and accept her suggestions.
In all things of nature there is something of the marvelous.
Nature does nothing uselessly.
He maketh me to lie down in green pastures he leadeth me beside the still waters.
A lot of people like snow. I find it to be an unnecessary freezing of water.
Real freedom lies in wildness, not in civilization.
Art is born of the observation and investigation of nature.
Nature herself makes the wise man rich.
The materials of wealth are in the earth, in the seas, and in their natural and unaided productions.
I speak for the trees, for the trees have no tongues.
I would feel more optimistic about a bright future for man if he spent less time proving that he can outwit Nature and more time tasting her sweetness and respecting her seniority.
Mountains inspire awe in any human person who has a soul. They remind us of our frailty, our unimportance, of the briefness of our span upon this earth. They touch the heavens, and sail serenely at an altitude beyond even the imaginings of a mere mortal.
I believe in God, only I spell it Nature.
Adapt or perish, now as ever, is nature's inexorable imperative.
In wildness is the preservation of the world.
It is pleasant to have been to a place the way a river went.
Nature is wont to hide herself.
It was the Law of the Sea, they said. Civilization ends at the waterline. Beyond that, we all enter the food chain, and not always right at the top.
What nature delivers to us is never stale. Because what nature creates has eternity in it.
One cannot fix one's eyes on the commonest natural production without finding food for a rambling fancy.
My mission is to create a world where we can live in harmony with nature.
People say to me so often, 'Jane how can you be so peaceful when everywhere around you people want books signed, people are asking these questions and yet you seem peaceful,' and I always answer that it is the peace of the forest that I carry inside.
You think Nature is some Disney movie? Nature is a killer. Nature is a bitch. It's feeding time out there 24 hours a day, every step that you take is a gamble with death. If it isn't getting hit with lightning today, it's an earthquake tomorrow or some deer tick carrying Lime disease. Either way, you're ending up on the wrong end of the food chain.
Climb the mountains and get their good tidings. Nature's peace will flow into you as sunshine flows into trees. The winds will blow their own freshness into you, and the storms their energy, while cares will drop away from you like the leaves of Autumn.
Come to the woods, for here is rest. There is no repose like that of the green deep woods. Here grow the wallflower and the violet. The squirrel will come and sit upon your knee, the logcock will wake you in the morning. Sleep in forgetfulness of all ill. Of all the upness accessible to mortals, there is no upness comparable to the mountains.
Everybody needs beauty as well as bread, places to play in and pray in, where nature may heal and give strength to body and soul alike.
Not even the gods fight against necessity.
Necessity has no law.
Necessity is the plea for every infringement of human freedom. It is the argument of tyrants; it is the creed of slaves.
This is the best kind of voyeurism, hearing joy from your neighbors.
Virtue is not left to stand alone. He who practices it will have neighbors.
There are many who dare not kill themselves for fear of what the neighbors will say.
The Bible tells us to love our neighbors, and also to love our enemies; probably because they are generally the same people.
Some people did what their neighbors did so that if any lunatics were at large, one might know and avoid them.
A bad neighbor is a misfortune, as much as a good one is a great blessing.
The impersonal hand of government can never replace the helping hand of a neighbor. 
Ask about your neighbors, then buy the house.
How much time he saves who does not look to see what his neighbor says or does or thinks.
The good neighbor looks beyond the external accidents and discerns those inner qualities that make all men human and, therefore, brothers.
It is folly to punish your neighbor by fire when you live next door.
Don't buy the house; buy the neighborhood.
No matter how much you disagree with your kin, if you are a thoroughbred you will not discuss their shortcomings with the neighbors.
A nation is a society united by delusions about its ancestry and by common hatred of its neighbors.
Oh, treacherous night! thou lendest thy ready veil to every treason, and teeming mischief's beneath thy shade.
Sometimes I lie awake at night, and I ask, "Where have I gone wrong?" Then a voice says to me, "This is going to take more than one night."
Ignorance is the night of the mind, but a night without moon and star.
Those who dream by day are cognizant of many things which escape those who dream only by night.
For the night was not impartial. No, the night loved some more than others, served some more than others.
Wait until it is night before saying that it has been a fine day.
You never really hear the truth from your subordinates until after 10 in the evening.
Not being able to sleep is terrible. You have the misery of having partied all night... without the satisfaction.
I think wholeness comes from living your life consciously during the day and then exploring your inner life or unconscious at night.
Don't try to solve serious matters in the middle of the night.
I like the night. Without the dark, we'd never see the stars.
Noble life demands a noble architecture for noble uses of noble men. Lack of culture means what it has always meant: ignoble civilization and therefore imminent downfall.
It is nobler to declare oneself wrong than to insist on being right - especially when one is right.
I too shall lie in the dust when I am dead, but now let me win noble renown.
Whenever a man does a thoroughly stupid thing, it is always from the noblest motives.
Life ought to be a struggle of desire toward adventures whose nobility will fertilize the soul.
They are never alone that are accompanied with noble thoughts.
Put more trust in nobility of character than in an oath.
The truth is that there is nothing noble in being superior to somebody else. The only real nobility is in being superior to your former self.
No one can build his security upon the nobleness of another person.
Sweet mercy is nobility's true badge.
When men exercise their reason coolly and freely on a variety of distinct questions, they inevitably fall into different opinions on some of them. When they are governed by a common passion, their opinions, if they are to be called, will be the same.
It is not advisable, James, to venture unsolicited opinions. You should spare yourself the embarrassing discovery of their exact value to your listener.
Every man has a right to his opinion, but no man has a right to be wrong in his facts.
I think we ought always to entertain our opinions with some measure of doubt. I shouldn't wish people dogmatically to believe any philosophy, not even mine.
The opinions that are held with passion are always those for which no good ground exists; indeed the passion is the measure of the holders lack of rational conviction. Opinions in politics and religion are almost always held passionately.
I'm not sure I want popular opinion on my side -- I've noticed those with the most opinions often have the fewest facts.
Fight for your opinions, but do not believe that they contain the whole truth, or the only truth.
The recipe for perpetual ignorance is: be satisfied with your opinions and content with your knowledge.
The moment we begin to fear the opinions of others and hesitate to tell the truth that is in us, and from motives of policy are silent when we should speak, the divine floods of light and life no longer flow into our souls.
There is probably an element of malice in our readiness to overestimate people - we are, as it were, laying up for ourselves the pleasure of later cutting them down to size.
Opinions founded on prejudice are always sustained with the greatest of violence.
It is hard enough to remember my opinions, without also remembering my reasons for them!
Don't judge a man by his opinions, but what his opinions have made of him.
Nothing is more conducive to peace of mind than not having any opinions at all.
I have opinions of my own -- strong opinions -- but I don't always agree with them.
This imputation of inconsistency is one to which every sound politician and every honest thinker must sooner or later subject himself. The foolish and the dead alone never change their opinion.
Where there is much desire to learn, there of necessity will be much arguing, much writing, many opinions; for opinions in good men is but knowledge in the making.
Risk! Risk anything! Care no more for the opinions of others, for those voices. Do the hardest thing on earth for you. Act for yourself. Face the truth.
Patterning your life around other's opinions is nothing more than slavery.
I am not one of those who in expressing opinions confine themselves to facts.
Our opinions do not really blossom into fruition until we have expressed them to someone else.
Sane and intelligent human beings are like all other human beings, and carefully and cautiously and diligently conceal their private real opinions from the world and give out fictitious ones in their stead for general consumption.
It is much easier to break the rules when one s surrounded by strangers. One does not know any of them, so one cannot really care for their opinion.
You are young, my son, and, as the years go by, time will change and even reverse many of your present opinions. Refrain therefore awhile from setting yourself up as a judge of the highest matters.
You get fifteen democrats in a room, and you get twenty opinions.
There is no greater mistake than the hasty conclusion that opinions are worthless because they are badly argued.
Every difference of opinion is not a difference of principle.
Literature is strewn with the wreckage of men who have minded beyond reason the opinions of others.
What we have to do is to be forever curiously testing new opinions and courting new impressions.
Next to knowing when to seize an opportunity, the most important thing in life is to know when to forego an advantage.
Seize opportunity by the beard, for it is bald behind.
Small opportunities are often the beginning of great enterprises.
You have to recognize when the right place and the right time fuse and take advantage of that opportunity. There are plenty of opportunities out there. You can't sit back and wait.
There is no security on this earth, there is only opportunity.
Trouble is only opportunity in work clothes.
She had an unequalled gift... of squeezing big mistakes into small opportunities. 
Too many people are thinking of security instead of opportunity. They seem more afraid of life than death.
The Chinese use two brush strokes to write the word 'crisis.' One brush stroke stands for danger; the other for opportunity. In a crisis, be aware of the danger - but recognize the opportunity.
We are continually faced with a series of great opportunities brilliantly disguised as insoluble problems.
Equal opportunity means everyone will have a fair chance at being incompetent.
You create your opportunities by asking for them.
While we stop to think, we often miss our opportunity.
No great man ever complains of want of opportunity.
A wise man will make more opportunities than he finds.
Opportunity is missed by most people because it is dressed in overalls and looks like work.
THERE ARE NO MISTAKES, only opportunities.
We are confronted with insurmountable opportunities.
Perpetual optimism is a force multiplier.
The place where optimism most flourishes is the lunatic asylum.
The optimist proclaims that we live in the best of all possible worlds; and the pessimist fears this is true.
The reason we all like to think so well of others is that we are all afraid for ourselves. The basis of optimism is sheer terror.
I find nothing more depressing than optimism.
The point of living and of being an optimist, is to be foolish enough to believe the best is yet to come.
Many an optimist has become rich by buying out a pessimist.
For myself I am an optimist - it does not seem to be much use being anything else.
An optimist is the human personification of spring.
Painting: The art of protecting flat surfaces from the weather and exposing them to the critic.
A painting in a museum hears more ridiculous opinions than anything else in the world.
Painting is an attempt to come to terms with life. There are as many solutions as there are human beings.
Every artist dips his brush in his own soul, and paints his own nature into his pictures.
The painting has a life of its own. I try to let it come through.
It's not your painting anymore. It stopped being your painting the moment that you finished it.
Every time I paint a portrait I lose a friend.
A man paints with his brains and not with his hands. 
I say that good painters imitated nature; but that bad ones vomited it.
Painting is just another way of keeping a diary.
There are painters who transform the sun to a yellow spot, but there are others who with the help of their art and their intelligence, transform a yellow spot into the sun.
Painting is silent poetry, and poetry is painting with the gift of speech.
Each painting has its own way of evolving...When the painting is finished, the subject reaveals itself.
How simple a thing it seems to me that to know ourselves as we are, we must know our mothers' names.
The world is full of women blindsided by the unceasing demands of motherhood, still flabbergasted by how a job can be terrific and torturous.
Sometimes the laughter in mothering is the recognition of the ironies and absurdities. Sometime, though, it's just pure, unthinking delight.
Sooner or later we all quote our mothers.
The place of the father in the modern suburban family is a very small one, particularly if he plays golf.
The most remarkable thing about my mother is that for thirty years she served the family nothing but leftovers. The original meal has never been found.
My parents only had one argument in forty-five years. It lasted forty-three years.
By the time a man realizes that maybe his father was right, he usually has a son who thinks he's wrong.
Your parents, they give you your life, but then they try to give you their life.
The first half of our lives is ruined by our parents, and the second half by our children.
There's something unnatural about a woman finding babies or, more specifically, conversation about babies, boring. They'll think she's bitter, jealous, lonely. But she's also bored of everybody telling her how lucky she is, what with all that sleep and all that freedom and spare time, the ability to go on dates or head off to Paris at a moments notice. It sounds like they're consoling her, and she resents this and feels patronized by it.
If your parents never had children, chances are you won't, either.
A mother is not a person to lean on but a person to make leaning unnecessary.
The art of mothering is to teach the art of living to children.
The central struggle of parenthood is to let our hopes for our children outweigh our fears.
Having a baby's sweet face so close to your own, for so long a time as it takes to nurse 'em, is a great tonic for a sad soul.
Losing a baby is not a thing that you could ever get used to.
The gods visit the sins of the fathers upon the children.
There is nothing to suggest that mothering cannot be shared by several people.
That’s sort of a cliché about parents. We all believe that our children are the most beautiful children in the world. But the thing is, what no one really talks about is the fact that we all really believe it.
This is part of the essence of motherhood, watching your kid grow into her own person and not being able to do anything about it. Otherwise children would be nothing more than pets.
For rarely are sons similar to their fathers: most are worse, and a few are better than their fathers.
The most important thing she'd learned over the years was that there was no way to be a perfect mother and a million ways to be a good one.
Just a word of advice. Whenever you're furious with your parents or you think they're terrible, just remember, you vomited on them and they kept you.
It's interesting, on your second day of existence, to realize that your father is going to blame all the future failures of his life on you.
Fostering a spirit of cooperation with your ex means laying down your weapons in the war of divorce in order to protect your children.
It’s helpful to imagine your relationship with him or her as a business relationship rather than a personal one. Just as you wouldn’t share that you’re feeling fat, ugly, and depressed with a client or tell her that you’ve just met the love of your life and you’ve never been happier, these thoughts and feelings should be kept to yourself and not shared with your ex. Finally, as in any good business relationship, be honest and prepared to deliver what you promise.
The point is that no matter what your feelings are, your children will be better off if you make them your central focus and work diligently at keeping the parenting relationship civil and cooperative.
It does not always follow that good men are good fathers.
The thing that impresses me the most about America is the way parents obey their children.
The happiness of a man in this life does not consist in the absence but in the mastery of his passions.
My passions were all gathered together like fingers that made a fist. Drive is considered aggression today; I knew it then as purpose.
He only employs his passion who can make no use of his reason.
Be still when you have nothing to say; when genuine passion moves you, say what you've got to say, and say it hot.
Only passions, great passions, can elevate the soul to great things.
The worst sin - perhaps the only sin - passion can commit, is to be joyless.
Judgement, not passion should prevail.
Nothing great in the world has been accomplished without passion.
Passion makes the world go round. Love just makes it a safer place.
Blaze with the fire that is never extinguished.
Waste no more time talking about great souls and how they should be. Become one yourself!
When the habitually even-tempered suddenly fly into a passion, that explosion is apt to be more impressive than the outburst of the most violent amongst us.
I had learnt to seek intensity more of life, a concentrated sense of life.
Do the one thing you think you cannot do. Fail at it. Try again. Do better the second time. The only people who never tumble are those who never mount the high wire. This is your moment. Own it.
I believe that one of life's greatest risks is never daring to risk.
You will need to find your passion. Don't give up on finding it because then all you're doing is waiting for the Reaper.
You will not find your passion in things and you will not find your passion in money. The more things and the more money you have, the more you will look around and use that as the metric and there will be someone with more.
Your pasion must come from the things that fuel you from the inside. Honors and awards are nice things, but only to the extent that they regard the real respect from your peers.
It's the soul's duty to be loyal to its own desires. It must abandon itself to its master passion.
Passion is the quickest to develop, and the quickest to fade. Intimacy develops more slowly, and commitment more gradually still.
The biggest thing [Frida] brought into my life was this peacefulness. I still get passionate about things, but my passion is not so scattered and it's not needy. It's a lot more powerful because it comes with this groundedness and peacefulness. That it's about the process, not about the results.
There was a disturbance in my heart, a voice that spoke there and said, I want, I want, I want! It happened every afternoon, and when I tried to suppress it it got even stronger.
It is easier to exclude harmful passions than to rule them, and to deny them admittance than to control them after they have been admitted.
What makes the engine go? Desire, desire, desire.
Passion kept one fully in the present, so that time became a series of mutually exclusive 'nows.'
Learn the art of patience. Apply discipline to your thoughts when they become anxious over the outcome of a goal. Impatience breeds anxiety, fear, discouragement and failure. Patience creates confidence, decisiveness, and a rational outlook, which eventually leads to success.
Patience is the greatest of all virtues.
A handful of patience is worth more than a bushel of brains.
Our patience will achieve more than our force.
It is very strange that the years teach us patience - that the shorter our time, the greater our capacity for waiting.
There art two cardinal sins from which all others spring: Impatience and Laziness.
Patience has its limits. Take it too far, and it's cowardice.
We could never learn to be brave and patient, if there were only joy in the world.
The fates have given mankind a patient soul.
If I have ever made any valuable discoveries, it has been owing more to patient attention, than to any other talent.
Patience serves as a protection against wrongs as clothes do against cold. For if you put on more clothes as the cold increases, it will have no power to hurt you. So in like manner you must grow in patience when you meet with great wrongs, and they will then be powerless to vex your mind.
I am extraordinarily patient, provided I get my own way in the end.
There will be a time when loud-mouthed, incompetent people seem to be getting the best of you. When that happens, you only have to be patient and wait for them to self destruct. It never fails.
Patience is the companion of wisdom.
Have patience with all things, but chiefly have patience with yourself. Do not lose courage in considering your own imperfections but instantly set about remedying them - every day begin the task anew.
You must first have a lot of patience to learn to have patience.
Patience is the best remedy for every trouble.
Have courage for the great sorrows of life and patience for the small ones; and when you have laboriously accomplished your daily task, go to sleep in peace. God is awake.
A high hope for a low heaven: God grant us patience!
A very little thief of occasion will rob you of a great deal of patience.
Had it pleas'd heaven to try me with affliction... I should have found in some place of my soul a drop of patience.
How poor are they that have not patience! What wound did ever heal but by degrees?
How poor are they who have not patience! What wound did ever heal but by degrees.
I do oppose my patience to his fury, and am arm'd to suffer with a quietness of spirit, the very tyranny and rage of his.
Patience is sottish, and impatience does become a dog that's mad.
Though patience be a tired mare, yet she will plod.
Upon the heat and flame of thy distemper sprinkle cool patience.
Patriotism is the willingness to kill and be killed for trivial reasons.
The contest, for ages, has been to rescue Liberty from the grasp of executive power.
"My country, right or wrong," is a thing that no patriot would think of saying except in a desperate case. It is like saying, "My mother, drunk or sober."
Liberty also means responsibility. That is why most men dread it.
Patriotism is your conviction that this country is superior to all other countries because you were born in it.
You'll never have a quiet world till you knock the patriotism out of the human race.
Patriotism is often an arbitrary veneration of real estate above principles.
Don't be a fool and die for your country. Let the other sonofabitch die for his.
Whenever you hear a man speak of his love for his country, it is a sign that he expects to be paid for it.
It is not unseemly for a man to die fighting in defense of his country.
The single best augury is to fight for one's country.
We would rather starve than sell our national honor.
Our obligations to our country never cease but with our lives.
And so, my fellow americans: ask not what your country can do for you - ask what you can do for your country. My fellow citizens of the world: ask not what America will do for you, but what together we can do for the freedom of man.
Let every nation know, whether it wishes us well or ill, that we shall pay any price, bear any burden, meet any hardship, support any friend, oppose any foe to assure the survival and the success of liberty.
How beautiful is death, when earn'd by virtue!  Who would not be that youth? What pity is it  That we can die but once to serve our country!
You're not to be so blind with patriotism that you can't face reality. Wrong is wrong, no matter who does it or says it.
I only regret that I have but one life to lose for my country.
When a whole nation is roaring Patriotism at the top of its voice, I am fain to explore the cleanness of its hands and purity of its heart.
True patriotism sometimes requires of men to act exactly contrary, at one period, to that which it does at another, and the motive which impels themthe desire to do rightis precisely the same.
Patriotism is the last refuge of a scoundrel.
When I am abroad, I always make it a rule never to criticize or attack the government of my own country. I make up for lost time when I come home.
I would rather be exposed to the inconveniencies attending too much liberty than those attending too small a degree of it.
It behoves every man who values liberty of conscience for himself, to resist invasions of it in the case of others; or their case may, by change of circumstances, become his own.
The flag is the embodiment, not of sentiment, but of history.
The history of liberty is the history of resistance. The history of liberty is a history of the limitation of governmental power, not the increase of it.
We shall find peace. We shall hear the angels, we shall see the sky sparkling with diamonds.
We make war that we may live in peace.
For peace is not mere absence of war, but is a virtue that springs from the force of character.
Peace is not an absence of war, it is a virtue, a state of mind, a disposition for benevolence, confidence, justice.
At present the peace of the world has been preserved, not by statesmen, but by capitalists.
Peace has never come from dropping bombs. Real peace comes from enlightenment and educating people to behave more in a divine manner.
The name of peace is sweet, and the thing itself is beneficial, but there is a great difference between peace and servitude. Peace is freedom in tranquillity, servitude is the worst of all evils, to be resisted not only by war, but even by death.
I like to believe that people in the long run are going to do more to promote peace than our governments. Indeed, I think that people want peace so much that one of these days governments had better get out of the way and let them have it.
Yes, God and the politicians willing, the United States can declare peace upon the world, and win it.
Let him who desires peace prepare for war.
If man does find the solution for world peace it will be the most revolutionary reversal of his record we have ever known.
To be prepared for war is one of the most effectual means of preserving peace.
Has not peace honours and glories of her own unattended by the dangers of war?
Peace is not a relationship of nations. It is a condition of mind brought about by a serenity of soul. Peace is not merely the absence of war. It is also a state of mind. Lasting peace can come only to peaceful people.
The only alternative to coexistence is codestruction.
Peace can be a cover whereby evil men can perpetrate diabolical wrongs.
You can't separate peace from freedom because no one can be at peace unless he has his freedom.
If you want to make peace, you don't talk to your friends. You talk to your enemies.
If you want peace, stop fighting. If you want peace of mind, stop fighting with your thoughts.
Every day we do things, we are things that have to do with peace. If we are aware of our life..., our way of looking at things, we will know how to make peace right in the moment, we are alive.
First keep the peace within yourself, then you can also bring peace to others.
Peace with all nations, and the right which that gives us with respect to all nations, are our object.
That peace, safety, and concord may be the portion of our native land, and be long enjoyed by our fellow-citizens, is the most ardent wish of my heart, and if I can be instrumental in procuring or preserving them, I shall think I have not lived in vain.
One cannot find peace in work or in pleasure, in the world or in a convent, but only in one's soul.
Tao. Some of us look for the Way in opium and some in God, some of us in whiskey and some in love. It is all the same Way and it leads nowhither.
Peace is an unstable equilibrium, which can be preserved only by acknowledged supremacy or equal power.
The peace of heaven is theirs that lift their swords, in such a just and charitable war.
Only a peace between equals can last. Only a peace the very principle of which is equality and a common participation in a common benefit.
I never expect to see a perfect work from imperfect man.
The thing that is really hard, and really amazing, is giving up on being perfect and beginning the work of becoming yourself.
Perfection is achieved, not when there is nothing more to add, but when there is nothing left to take away.
Perfection is a road, not a destination. Every time I live, I get an education.
Aim for success, not perfection. Never give up your right to be wrong, because then you will lose the ability to learn new things and move forward with your life.
Assert your right to make a few mistakes. If people can't accept your imperfections, that's their fault.
Remember that fear always lurks behind perfectionism. Confronting your fears and allowing yourself the right to be human can, paradoxically, make you a far happier and more productive person.
Artists who seek perfection in everything are those who cannot attain it in anything.
I do think imperfection's underrated.
No one can be perfectly free till all are free; no one can be perfectly moral till all are moral; no one can be perfectly happy till all are happy.
Perfectionism is simply putting a limit on your future. When you have an idea of perfect in your mind, you open the door to constantly comparing what you have now with what you want. That type of self criticism is significantly deterring.
The idea of perfect closes your mind to new standards. When you drive hard toward one ideal, you miss opportunities and paths, not to mention hurting your confidence. Believe in your potential and then go out and explore it; don't limit it.
I don't confuse greatness with perfection. To be great anyhow is the higher achievement.
I am careful not to confuse excellence with perfection. Excellence, I can reach for; perfection is God's business.
[M]aybe the most any of us can expect of ourselves isn't perfection but progress.
To demand perfection is a sure way to be disappointed in everybody, for you will be bound to think ill of others.
In the eyes of those lovers of perfection, a work is never finished--a word that for them has no sense--but abandoned; and this abandonment, whether to the flames or to the public (and which is the result of weariness or an obligation to deliver) is a kind of an accident to them, like the breaking off of a reflection, which fatigue, irritation, or something similar has made worthless.
Have patience with all things, but chiefly have patience with yourself. Do not lose courage in considering your own imperfections but instantly set about remedying them - every day begin the task anew.
Have no fear of perfection - you'll never reach it.
Try as hard as we may for perfection, the net result of our labors is an amazing variety of imperfectness. We are surprised at our own versatility in being able to fail in so many different ways.
If you'd like to be good at something, the first thing to out the window is the notion of perfection.
You have to let people see what you wrote. It will never be perfect, but perfect is overrated. Perfect is boring.
We are all imperfect. We cannot expect perfect government.
By perseverance the snail reached the ark. 
I think a hero is an ordinary individual who finds strength to persevere and endure in spite of overwhelming obstacles.
The difference between perseverance and obstinacy is that one comes from a strong will; and the other from a strong won't.
You have to keep plugging away. We are all growing. There is no shortcut. You have to put time into it to build an audience
Courage and perseverance have a magical talisman, before which difficulties disappear and obstacles vanish into air.
If you wish success in life, make perseverance your bosom friend, experience your wise counselor, caution your elder brother and hope your guardian genius.
Victory belongs to the most persevering.
Perseverance is more prevailing than violence; and many things which cannot be overcome when they are together, yield themselves up when taken little by little.
Few things are impossible to diligence and skill. Great works are performed not by strength, but perseverance.
Energy and persistence conquer all things.
Nothing in the world can take the place of Persistence. Talent will not; nothing is more common than unsuccessful men with talent. Genius will not; unrewarded genius is almost a proverb. Education will not; the world is full of educated derelicts. Persistence and determination alone are omnipotent. The slogan 'Press On' has solved and always will solve the problems of the human race.
You must keep sending work out; you must never let a manuscript do nothing but eat its head off in a drawer. You send that work out again and again, while you're working on another one. If you have talent, you will receive some measure of success - but only if you persist.
That which we persist in doing becomes easier, not that the task itself has become easier, but that our ability to perform it has improved.
We are made to persist. That's how we find out who we are.
If a dog jumps in your lap, it is because he is fond of you; but if a cat does the same thing, it is because your lap is warmer.
We call them dumb animals, and so they are, for they cannot tell us how they feel, but they do not suffer less because they have no words.
I loathe people who keep dogs. They are cowards who haven't got the guts to bite people themselves.
Yesterday I was a dog. Today I'm a dog. Tomorrow I'll probably still be a dog. Sigh! There's so little hope for advancement.
It's funny how dogs and cats know the inside of folks better than other folks do, isn't it?
If you are a dog and your owner suggests that you wear a sweater, suggest that he wear a tail.
No animal should ever jump up on the dining-room furniture unless absolutely certain that he can hold his own in the conversation.
Animals are such agreeable friends - they ask no questions, they pass no criticisms.
Cats regard people as warmblooded furniture.
Cats are smarter than dogs. You can't get eight cats to pull a sled through snow.
Old age means realizing you will never own all the dogs you wanted to.
My dog is worried about the economy because Alpo is up to 99 cents a can. That's almost $7.00 in dog money.
If you pick up a starving dog and make him prosperous, he will not bite you. This is the principal difference between a dog and a man.
We are alone, absolutely alone on this chance planet: and, amid all the forms of life that surround us, not one, excepting the dog, has made an alliance with us.
A door is what a dog is perpetually on the wrong side of.
On the Internet, nobody knows you're a dog.
I wonder if other dogs think poodles are members of a weird religious cult.
A boy can learn a lot from a dog: obedience, loyalty, and the importance of turning around three times before lying down.
I like pigs. Dogs look up to us. Cats look down on us. Pigs treat us as equals.
Did you ever walk into a room and forget why you walked in? I think that's how dogs spend their lives.
Cats are intended to teach us that not everything in nature has a function.
I think we ought always to entertain our opinions with some measure of doubt. I shouldn't wish people dogmatically to believe any philosophy, not even mine.
The point of philosophy is to start with something so simple as not to seem worth stating, and to end with something so paradoxical that no one will believe it.
This is patently absurd; but whoever wishes to become a philosopher must learn not to be frightened by absurdities.
There's a difference between a philosophy and a bumper sticker.
There is nothing so absurd but some philosopher has said it.
Who you are isn't tied solely to what you say, even though it may feel that way to you now.
I went off to college planning to major in math or philosophy-- of course, both those ideas are really the same idea.
Philosophy consists very largely of one philosopher arguing that all others are jackasses. He usually proves it, and I should add that he also usually proves that he is one himself.
Philosophy is a battle against the bewitchment of our intelligence by means of language.
One cannot conceive anything so strange and so implausible that it has not already been said by one philosopher or another.
Philosophers say a great deal about what is absolutely necessary for science, and it is always, so far as one can see, rather naive, and probably wrong.
All philosophies, if you ride them, are nonsense, but some are greater nonsense than others.
Leisure is the mother of philosophy.
True philosophy invents nothing; it merely establishes and describes what is.
There is only one thing a philosopher can be relied upon to do, and that is to contradict other philosophers.
There are more things in heaven and earth, Horatio,Than are dreamt of in your philosophy.
'To the complaint, 'There are no people in these photographs,' I respond, 'There are always two people: the photographer and the viewer.'
I have often thought that if photography were difficult in the true sense of the term -- meaning that the creation of a simple photograph would entail as much time and effort as the production of a good watercolor or etching -- there would be a vast improvement in total output. The sheer ease with which we can produce a superficial image often leads to creative disaster.
A photograph is a secret about a secret. The more it tells you the less you know.
Best wide-angle lens? Two steps backward. Look for the 'ah-ha'.
The camera doesn't make a bit of difference. All of them can record what you are seeing. But, you have to SEE.
We try to grab pieces of our lives as they speed past us. Photographs freeze those pieces and help us remember how we were. We don't know these lost people but if you look around, you'll find someone just like them.
Photographers deal in things which are continually vanishing and when they have vanished there is no contrivance on earth which can make them come back again.
Maybe because it's entirely an artist's eye, patience and skill that makes an image and not his tools.
No matter how advanced your camera you still need to be responsible for getting it to the right place at the right time and pointing it in the right direction to get the photo you want.
The camera's only job is to get out of the way of making photographs.
Your equipment DOES NOT affect the quality of your image. The less time and effort you spend worrying about your equipment the more time and effort you can spend creating great images. The right equipment just makes it easier, faster or more convenient for you to get the results you need.
No matter how slow the film, Spirit always stands still long enough for the photographer It has chosen.
Photography, fortunately, to me has not only been a profession but also a contact between people - to understand human nature and record, if possible, the best in each individual.
Every portrait that is painted with feeling is a portrait of the artist, not of the sitter.
They used to photograph Shirley Temple through gauze. They should photograph me through linoleum.
All science is either physics or stamp collecting.
In physics, your solution should convince a reasonable person. In math, you have to convince a person who's trying to make trouble. Ultimately, in physics, you're hoping to convince Nature. And I've found Nature to be pretty reasonable.
For the truth of the conclusions of physical science, observation is the supreme Court of Appeal. It does not follow that every item which we confidently accept as physical knowledge has actually been certified by the Court; our confidence is that it would be certified by the Court if it were submitted. But it does follow that every item of physical knowledge is of a form which might be submitted to the Court. It must be such that we can specify (although it may be impracticable to carry out) an observational procedure which would decide whether it is true or not. Clearly a statement cannot be tested by observation unless it is an assertion about the results of observation. Every item of physical knowledge must therefore be an assertion of what has been or would be the result of carrying out a specified observational procedure.
I ask you to look both ways. For the road to a knowledge of the stars leads through the atom; and important knowledge of the atom has been reached through the stars.
It is impossible to trap modern physics into predicting anything with perfect determinism because it deals with probabilities from the outset.
Not only is the universe stranger than we imagine, it is stranger than we can imagine.
Something unknown is doing we don't know what.
We have found a strange footprint on the shores of the unknown. We have devised profound theories, one after another, to account for its origins. At last, we have succeeded in reconstructing the creature that made the footprint. And lo! It is our own.
The secret to creativity is knowing how to hide your sources.
Don't worry about people stealing an idea. If it's original, you will have to ram it down their throats.
I don't like composers who think. It gets in the way of their plagiarism.
About the most originality that any writer can hope to achieve honestly is to steal with good judgment.
Art is either plagiarism or revolution.
Bite off more than you can chew, then chew it. Plan more than you can do, then do it.
A goal without a plan is just a wish.
Make no little plans; they have no magic to stir men's blood...Make big plans, aim high in hope and work.
In preparing for battle I have always found that plans are useless, but planning is indispensable.
A good plan, violently executed now, is better than a perfect plan next week. 
Zeus does not bring all men's plans to fulfillment.
We must be willing to get rid of the life we've planned, so as to have the life that is waiting for us.
Create a definite plan for carrying out your desire and begin at once, whether you are ready or not, to put this plan into action.
Plans are only good intentions unless they immediately degenerate into hard work.
It is a bad plan that admits of no modification.
Self-control is not a problem in the future. It's only a problem NOW when the chocolates is next to us.
Just because something doesn't do what you planned it to do doesn't mean it's useless.
When we are planning for posterity, we ought to remember that virtue is not hereditary.
He who every morning plans the transaction of the day and follows out that plan, carries a thread that will guide him through the maze of the most busy life. But where no plan is laid, where the disposal of time is surrendered merely to the chance of incidence, chaos will soon reign.
Most people ignore most poetry  because  most poetry ignores most people.
It's easier to quote poets than to read them.
There exist only three beings worthy of respect: the priest, the soldier, the poet. To know, to kill, to create.
The freedom of poetic license.
A poem is no place for an idea.
My poems are hymns of praise to the glory of life.
Poetry is the deification of reality.
All slang is a metaphor, and all metaphor is poetry.
Poets have been mysteriously silent on the subject of cheese.
A poet more than thirty years old is simply an overgrown child.
Many brave men lived before Agamemnon; but all are overwhelmed in eternal night, unwept, unknown, because they lack a sacred poet.
It was the misfortune of poetry to be seldom safely enjoyed by those who enjoyed it completely; and that the strong feelings which alone could estimate it truly were the very feelings which ought to taste it but sparingly.
The worst tragedy for a poet is to be admired through being misunderstood.
One ought, every day at least, to hear a little song, read a good poem, see a fine picture, and if it were possible, to speak a few reasonable words.
You don't have to suffer to be a poet; adolescence is enough suffering for anyone.
Poetry should please by a fine excess and not by singularity. It should strike the reader as a wording of his own highest thoughts, and appear almost as a remembrance.
Poetry often enters through the window of irrelevance.
I was working on the proof of one of my poems all the morning, and took out a comma. In the afternoon I put it back again.
In science one tries to tell people, in such a way as to be understood by everyone, something that no one ever knew before. But in poetry, it's the exact opposite.
A poem is never finished, only abandoned.
Every English poet should master the rules of grammar before he attempts to bend or break them.
A poet who reads his verse in public may have other nasty habits.
A prose writer gets tired of writing prose, and wants to be a poet. So he begins every line with a capital letter, and keeps on writing prose.
A poet ought not to pick nature's pocket. Let him borrow, and so borrow as to repay by the very act of borrowing. Examine nature accurately, but write from recollection, and trust more to the imagination than the memory.
A poet's hope: to be,like some valley cheese,local, but prized elsewhere.
The poet judges not as a judge judges but as the sun falling around a helpless thing.
A garden, you know, is a very usual refuge of a disappointed politician. Accordingly, I have purchased a few acres about nine miles from town, have built a house, and am cultivating a garden.
Under every stone lurks a politician.
You have all the characteristics of a popular politician: a horrible voice, bad breeding, and a vulgar manner.
Now I know what a statesman is; he's a dead politician. We need more statesmen.
I have come to the conclusion that politics are too serious a matter to be left to the politicians.
Since a politician never believes what he says, he is quite surprised to be taken at his word.
Government is too big and too important to be left to the politicians.
Anyone who is capable of getting themselves made President should on no account be allowed to do the job.
Get all the fools on your side and you can be elected to anything.
Ninety percent of the politicians give the other ten percent a bad reputation.
If I wanted to go crazy I would do it in Washington because it would not be noticed.
If God had wanted us to vote, he would have given us candidates.
Mothers may still want their sons to grow up to be President, but according to a famous Gallup poll of some years ago, some 73 percent do not want them to become politicians in the process.
The reason there are so few female politicians is that it is too much trouble to put makeup on two faces.
Politicians are the same all over. They promise to build a bridge even where there is no river.
I once said cynically of a politician, 'He'll doublecross that bridge when he comes to it.'
He that would govern others, first should be the master of himself.
The two parties which divide the state, the party of Conservatism and that of Innovation, are very old, and have disputed the possession of the world ever since it was made.
He has been called a mediocre man; but this is unwarranted flattery. He was a politician of monumental littleness.
There is no such thing as a nonpolitical speech by a politician.
An honest politician is one who, when he is bought, will stay bought.
You've got to vote for someone. It's a shame, but it's got to be done.
That's the trouble with a politician's life-somebody is always interrupting it with an election.
It is the duty of every citizen according to his best capacities to give validity to his convictions in political affairs.
There is hardly a political question in the United States which doesn't sooner or later turn into a judicial one.
Crime does not pay ... as well as politics.
Politics, n. Strife of interests masquerading as a contest of principles.
Man is by nature a political animal.
Before we get too depressed about the state of our politics, let's remember our history. The great debates of the past, all stirred great passions. They all made somebody angry, and at least once led to a terrible war. What is amazing, is that despite all the conflict, our experiment in democracy has worked better than any form of government on earth.
If we choose only to expose ourselves to opinions and viewpoints that are in line to our own, we become more polarized, more set in our own ways. It will only reinforce and deepen the political divides in our country. But if we choose to actively seek out information that challenges our assumptions and beliefs, perhaps we can begin to understand where the people who disagree with us are coming from.
Politics has never been for the thin-skinned or the faint of heart, and if you enter the arena , you should expect to get roughed up. Moreover, Democracy in a nation of more than 300 million people is inherently difficult.
I have come to the conclusion that politics are too serious a matter to be left to the politicians.
Politics is made up largely of irrelevancies.
Politics ought to be the part-time profession of every citizen who would protect the rights and privileges of free people and who would preserve what is good and fruitful in our national heritage.
Politics is the art of looking for trouble, finding it whether it exists or not, diagnosing it incorrectly, and applying the wrong remedy.
Being in politics is like being a football coach. You have to be smart enough to understand the game, and dumb enough to think it's important.
When the political columnists say 'Every thinking man' they mean themselves, and when candidates appeal to 'Every intelligent voter' they mean everybody who is going to vote for them.
The whole aim of practical politics is to keep the populace alarmed (and hence clamorous to be led to safety) by menacing it with an endless series of hobgoblins, all of them imaginary.
Practical politics consists in ignoring facts.
The problem with political jokes is they get elected.
Most people assume the fights are going to be the left versus the right, but it always is the reasonable versus the jerks.
The United States Congress, like a lot of rich people, lives in two houses.
Nothing is so admirable in politics as a short memory.
Politics is not the art of the possible. It consists in choosing between the disastrous and the unpalatable.
The word 'politics' is derived from the word 'poly', meaning 'many', and the word 'ticks', meaning 'blood sucking parasites'.
Politics is the skilled use of blunt objects.
If one morning I walked on top of the water across the Potomac River, the headline that afternoon would read "President Can't Swim".
Politics is war without bloodshed while war is politics with bloodshed.
Politics has less to do with where you live than where your heart is.
Nothing can so alienate a voter from the political system as backing a winning candidate.
Politics is the art of the possible.
Politics is the art of preventing people from taking part in affairs which properly concern them.
In politics you must always keep running with the pack. The moment that you falter and they sense that you are injured, the rest will turn on you like wolves.
Most things worth having require some sacrifice, usually more than you expect.
We too often let the material things serve as indicators that we're doing well, even though something inside us tells us that were not doing our best. That we are avoiding that which is hard, but also necessary. That we are shrinking from rather than vising to the challenges of the age.
The wise man carries his possessions within him.
I love stuff as much as the next guy, but I’ve come to understand that, regardless of the cost of acquiring it, the price of having it is freedom.
Possession is eleven points in the law.
I take care of my things. After all, those of us as has few things to begin with must take care, lest we have fewer.
Before we set our hearts too much upon anything, let us examine how happy those are who already possess it.
Every increased possession loads us with new weariness.
To have little is to possess.To have plenty is to be perplexed.
Desire makes everything blossom; possession makes everything wither and fade.
An object in possession seldom retains the same charm that it had in pursuit.
I have everything, yet have nothing; and although I possess nothing, still of nothing am I in want.
It is through creating, not possessing, that life is revealed.
Poverty is the schoolmaster of character.
Poverty is the parent of revolution and crime.
Where justice is denied, where poverty is enforced, where ignorance prevails, and where any one class is made to feel that society is in an organized conspiracy to oppress, rob, and degrade them, neither persons nor property will be safe.
You are going to let the fear of poverty govern your life and your reward will be that you will eat, but you will not live.
It is not the rich man you should properly call happy, but him who knows how to use with wisdom the blessings of the gods, to endure hard poverty, and who fears dishonor worse than death, and is not afraid to die for cherished friends or fatherland.
Climbing out of poverty by your own efforts that is something on which to pride yourself, but poverty itself is romanticized only by fools.
It is not an ennobling experience. Poverty entails fear and stress and sometimes depression. It means a thousand petty humiliations and hardships.
Anyone who had ever struggled with poverty knows how extremely expensive it is to be poor.
It is not easy for men to rise whose qualities are thwarted by poverty.
It is pretty hard to tell what does bring happiness; poverty and wealth have both failed.
That is one consolation when you are poor—there are so many more things you can imagine about.
Wealth is the parent of luxury and indolence, and poverty of meanness and viciousness, and both of discontent.
To be poor and dependent is very nearly an impossibility.
Far better to think historically, to remember the lessons of the past. Thus, far better to conceive of power as consisting in part of the knowledge of when not to use all the power you have. Far better to be one who knows that if you reserve the power not to use all your power, you will lead others far more successfully and well.
Nearly all men can stand adversity, but if you want to test a man's character, give him power.
You see what power is - holding someone else's fear in your hand and showing it to them!
The sole advantage of power is that you can do more good.
To know the pains of power, we must go to those who have it; to know its pleasures, we must go to those who are seeking it.
It is said that power corrupts, but actually it's more true that power attracts the corruptible. The sane are usually attracted by other things than power.
Let not thy will roar, when thy power can but whisper.
Ultimately, the only power to which man should aspire is that which he exercises over himself.
It is when power is wedded to chronic fear that it becomes formidable.
There are similarities between absolute power and absolute faith: a demand for absolute obedience, a readiness to attempt the impossible, a bias for simple solutionsto cut the knot rather than unravel it, the viewing of compromise as surrender. Both absolute power and absolute faith are instruments of dehumanization. Hence, absolute faith corrupts as absolutely as absolute power.
If absolute power corrupts absolutely, does absolute powerlessness make you pure?
The great secret of power is never to will to do more than you can accomplish.
Be fit for more than the thing you are now doing. Let everyone know that you have a reserve in yourself; that you have more power than you are now using. If you are not too large for the place you occupy, you are too small for it.
The essence of government is power; and power, lodged as it must be in human hands, will ever be liable to abuse.
The essence of Government is power; and power, lodged as it must be in human hands, will ever be liable to abuse.
We all have the power to choose how we are going to handle every situation we are faced with throughout our lives. We are in control of the decision we make whether it’s about work, relationships, parenting, or our health.
Power corrupts. Absolute power is kind of neat.
One person with a belief is equal to a force of 99 who have only interests.
The secret of all power is - save your force. If you want high pressure you must choke off waste.
The one thing a creator can bring to the table when everybody else has all the money and power is centeredness and the ability to walk away. Never sit at a table you can't walk away from.
If power was an illusion, wasn't weakness necessarily one also?
Power tends to corrupt, and absolute power corrupts absolutely.
The highest proof of virtue is to possess boundless power without abusing it.
Power never takes a back step - only in the face of more power.
The problem of power is how to achieve its responsible use rather than its irresponsible and indulgent use - of how to get men of power to live for the public rather than off the public.
Most powerful is he who has himself in his own power.
Knowledge is power.
We thought, because we had power, we had wisdom.
Be thou the first true merit to befriend, his praise is lost who stays till all commend.
There are two modes of establishing our reputation: to be praised by honest men, and to be abused by rogues. It is best, however, to secure the former, because it will invariably be accompanied by the latter.
Such praise coming from so degraded a source, was degrading to me, its recipient.
He who praises you for what you lack wishes to take from you what you have.
It is a sign of a creeping inner death when we no longer can praise the living.
The meanest, most contemptible kind of praise is that which first speaks well of a man, and then qualifies it with a "but". 
Praise the young and they will flourish.
The praise that comes from love does not make us vain, but more humble.
You do ill if you praise, but worse if you censure, what you do not understand.
We are always more anxious to be distinguished for a talent which we do not possess, than to be praised for the fifteen which we do possess.
Don't discuss yourself, for you are bound to lose; if you belittle yourself, you are believed; if you praise yourself, you are disbelieved.
Praise, like gold and diamonds, owes its value only to its scarcity.
Be not too hasty either with praise or blame; speak always as though you were giving evidence before the judgement-seat of the Gods.
You can tell the character of every man when you see how he receives praise.
Praise from the common people is generally false, and rather follows the vain than the virtuous.
Real joy comes not from ease or riches or from the praise of men, but from doing something worthwhile.
If a man is proud of his wealth, he should not be praised until it is known how he employs it.
Think not those faithful who praise all thy words and actions; but those who kindly reprove thy faults.
Their silence is sufficient praise.
I do not confer praise or blame: I accept. I am the measure of all things. I am the centre of the world.
People ask for criticism, but they only want praise.
I pay no attention whatever to anybody's praise or blame. I simply follow my own feelings.
You must pray that the way be long, full of adventures and experiences.
Pray as if everything depended upon God and work as if everything depended upon man.
One single grateful thought raised to heaven is the most perfect prayer.
You can pray for someone even if you don't think God exists.
Prayer indeed is good, but while calling on the gods a man should himself lend a hand.
The time to pray is not when we are in a tight spot but just as soon as we get out of it.
You should pray for a sound mind in a sound body.
If the only prayer you ever say in your whole life is "thank you," that would suffice.
When the gods wish to punish us, they answer our prayers.
Do not pray for easy lives. Pray to be stronger men. Do not pray for tasks equal to your powers. Pray for powers equal to your tasks. Then the doing of your work shall be no miracle, but you shall be the miracle.
There are more tears shed over answered prayers than over unanswered prayers.
I have never made but one prayer to God, a very short one: 'O Lord, make my enemies ridiculous.' And God granted it.
Common sense is the collection of prejudices acquired by age eighteen.
The greatest friend of Truth is time, her greatest enemy is Prejudice, and her constant companion Humility.
Everyone is a prisoner of his own experiences. No one can eliminate prejudices - just recognize them.
Opinions founded on prejudice are always sustained with the greatest of violence.
If we were to wake up some morning and find that everyone was the same race, creed and color, we would find some other cause for prejudice by noon.
Criticism is prejudice made plausible.
It is never too late to give up our prejudices.
When the judgement's weak, The prejudice is strong.
Education is a method whereby one acquires a higher grade of prejudices.
Nobody outside of a baby carriage or a judge's chamber believes in an unprejudiced point of view.
There are, in every age, new errors to be rectified and new prejudices to be opposed.
Never try to reason the prejudice out of a man. It was not reasoned into him, and cannot be reasoned out.
When faced with sexism or ageism or lookism or even really aggressive Buddhism, ask yourself the following question:"Is this person in between me and what do I want to do?" If the answer is no, ignore it and move on. Your energy is better used doing your work and outpacing people that way. Then, when you're in charge, don't hire the people who were jerky to you.
Prejudice is opinion without judgement.
I am free of all prejudice. I hate everyone equally.
Without the aid of prejudice and custom I should not be able to find my way across the room.
A great many people think they are thinking when they are really rearranging their prejudices.
To know a man, observe how he wins his object, rather than how he loses it; for when we fail our pride supports us; when we succeed, it betrays us.
Pride sullies the noblest character.
When dealing with people, let us remember we are not dealing with creatures of logic. We are dealing with creatures of emotion, creatures bustling with prejudices and motivated by pride and vanity.
The pride of youth is in strength and beauty, the pride of old age is in discretion.
Be modest! It is the kind of pride least likely to offend.
Generosity is giving more than you can, and pride is taking less than you need.
To find yourself jilted is a blow to your pride. Do your best to forget it and if you don't succeed, at least pretend to.
Pride is a powerful narcotic, but it doesn't do much for the auto-immune system.
The charity that hastens to proclaim its good deeds, ceases to be charity, and is only pride and ostentation.
The path to our destination is not always a straight one. We go down the wrong road, we get lost, we turn back. Maybe it doesn't matter which road we embark on. Maybe what matters is that we embark.
The chief obstacle to the progress of the human race is the human race.
The reasonable man adapts himself to the world; the unreasonable one persists in trying to adapt the world to himself. Therefore all progress depends on the unreasonable man.
The reasonable man adapts himself to the world; the unreasonable one persists in trying to adapt the world to himself. Therefore, all progress depends on the unreasonable man.
What we call 'Progress' is the exchange of one nuisance for another nuisance.
The advancement of the arts from year to year taxes our credulity, and seems to presage the arrival of that period when human improvement must end.
Progress might have been all right once, but it has gone on too long.
I was to learn later that in life that we tend to meet any new situation by reorganizing; and what a wonderful method it can be for creating the illusion of progress while producing confusion, inefficiency, and demoralization.
Never discourage anyone...who continually makes progress, no matter how slow.
Usually, terrible things that are done with the excuse that progress requires them are not really progress at all, but just terrible things.
All progress is based upon a universal innate desire on the part of every organism to live beyond its income.
Every day you may make progress. Every step may be fruitful. Yet there will stretch out before you an ever-lengthening, ever-ascending, ever-improving path. You know you will never get to the end of the journey. But this, so far from discouraging, only adds to the joy and glory of the climb.
Progress is the product of human agency. Things get better because we make them better. Things go wrong when we get too comfortable, when we fail to take risks or seize opportunities.
No wonder Americans hate politics when, year in and year out, they hear politicians make promises that won't come true because they don't even mean them - campaign fantasies that win elections but don't get nations moving again.
Hypocrisy can afford to be magnificent in its promises; for never intending to go beyond promises; it costs nothing.
Promises that you make to yourself are often like the Japanese plum tree - they bear no fruit.
One must have a good memory to be able to keep the promises one makes.
He that promises most will perform least.
He who promises more than he is able to perform, is false to himself; and he who does not perform what he has promised, is a traitor to his friend.
When life seems chaotic, you don't need people giving you easy answers or cheap promises. There might not be any answers to your problems. What you need is a safe place where you can bounce with people who have taken some bad hops of their own.
Sometimes people don’t understand the promises they’re making when they make them. Right, of course. But you keep the promise anyway. That’s what love is. Love is keeping the promise anyway.
You can make those promises with just as much passion the second time around. Such is the regenerative power of the human heart.
The woods are lovely, dark, and deep, But I have promises to keep, And miles to go before I sleep, And miles to go before I sleep.
Magnificent promises are always to be suspected.
If you refuse to be made straight when you are green, you will not be made straight when you are dry.
When you have given nothing, ask for nothing.
Good habits result from resisting temptation.
Dwell not upon thy weariness, thy strength shall be according to the measure of thy desire.
Examine what is said, not him who speaks.
Make your bargain before beginning to plow.
Don't make use of another's mouth unless it has been lent to you.
Seize opportunity by the beard, for it is bald behind.
Be not afraid of growing slowly, be afraid only of standing still.
Do not employ handsome servants.
Do not remove a fly from your friend's forehead with a hatchet.
Give a man a fish and you feed him for a day. Teach a man to fish and you feed him for a lifetime.
He who asks is a fool for five minutes, but he who does not ask remains a fool forever.
If you bow at all, bow low.
Keep your broken arm inside your sleeve.
Raise your sail one foot and you get ten feet of wind.
The gem cannot be polished without friction, nor man perfected without trials.
The palest ink is better than the best memory.
To know the road ahead, ask those coming back.
When you drink the water, remember the spring.
When you have only two pennies left in the world, buy a loaf of bread with one, and a lily with the other.
Do not protect yourself by a fence, but rather by your friends.
The big thieves hang the little ones.
When you go to buy, use your eyes, not your ears.
Ask advice only of your equals.
He who would leap high must take a long run.
A handful of patience is worth more than a bushel of brains.
A full cup must be carried steadily.
Don't fall before you're pushed.
Use soft words and hard arguments.
The important thing is not to stop questioning. Curiosity has its own reason for existing. One cannot help but be in awe when he contemplates the mysteries of eternity, of life, of the marvelous structure of reality. It is enough if one tries merely to comprehend a little of this mystery every day. Never lose a holy curiosity.
You can question somebody's views and their judgment without questioning their motives or patriotism.
In all affairs it's a healthy thing now and then to hang a question mark on the things you have long taken for granted.
Look at all the sentences which seem true and question them.
A thinker sees his own actions as experiments and questions--as attempts to find out something. Success and failure are for him answers above all.
One's first step in wisdom is to question everything - and one's last is to come to terms with everything.
A young man is embarrassed to question an older one.
It is better to know some of the questions than all of the answers.
If you ask too many questions, you will find no answers, only more questions.
Ask questions from your heart and you will be answered from the heart.
There are two sides to every question.
It is not every question that deserves an answer.
A wise man's question contains half the answer. 
The most erroneous stories are those we think we know best - and therefore never scrutinize or question.
So many men so many questions. (Quot Homines Tot Sententiae)
The outcome of any serious research can only be to make two questions grow where only one grew before.
Judge of a man by his questions rather than by his answers.
Everything of importance has been said before by somebody who did not discover it.
I have suffered a great deal from writers who have quoted this or that sentence of mine either out of its context or in juxtaposition to some incongruous matter which quite distorted my meaning , or destroyed it altogether.
The point of quotations is that one can use another's words to be insulting.
Quotation, n: The act of repeating erroneously the words of another.
One must be a wise reader to quote wisely and well.
When a thing has been said and well, have no scruple. Take it and copy it.
Be careful -- with quotations, you can damn anything.
Write a wise saying and your name will live forever.
It is unbecoming for young men to utter maxims.
The wisdom of the wise, and the experience of ages, may be preserved by quotation.
A quotation in a speech, article or book is like a rifle in the hands of an infantryman. It speaks with authority.
To be amused by what you read--that is the great spring of happy quotations.
I never have found the perfect quote. At best I have been able to find a string of quotations which merely circle the ineffable idea I seek to express.
I improve on misquotation.
The American people would not want to know of any misquotes that Dan Quayle may or may not make.
People will accept your ideas much more readily if you tell them Benjamin Franklin said it first.
What's the use of a good quotation if you can't change it?
A facility for quotation covers the absence of original thought.
I might repeat to myself slowly and soothingly, a list of quotations beautiful from minds profound - if I can remember any of the damn things.
Some for renown, on scraps of learning dote, And think they grow immortal as they quote.
An epigram often flashes light into regions where reason shines but dimly.
If you have any doubts that we live in a society controlled by men, try reading down the index of contributors to a volume of quotations, looking for women's names.
I often quote myself. It adds spice to my conversation.
After all, all he did was string together a lot of old, well-known quotations.
Misquotation is, in fact, the pride and privilege of the learned. A widely- read man never quotes accurately, for the rather obvious reason that he has read too widely.
Misquotations are the only quotations that are never misquoted.
Life itself is a quotation.
A fine quotation is a diamond on the finger of a man of wit, and a pebble in the hand of a fool.
What a good thing Adam had. When he said a good thing he knew nobody had said it before.
I love quotations because it is a joy to find thoughts one might have, beautifully expressed with much authority by someone recognized wiser than oneself.
Reality is merely an illusion, albeit a very persistent one.
Everything is a dangerous drug except reality, which is unendurable.
You bluffed me! I don't like it when people bluff me. It makes me question my perception of reality.
Set up as an ideal the facing of reality as honestly and as cheerfully as possible.
Joel: That's the movies, Ed. Try reality. Ed: No thanks.
I believe in looking reality straight in the eye and denying it.
The real distinction is between those who adapt their purposes to reality and those who seek to mold reality in the light of their purposes.
Realism...has no more to do with reality than anything else.
Reality is nothing but a collective hunch.
Reality is the leading cause of stress amongst those in touch with it.
Important days don't look like anything special when they start. Invariably, the sun rises and people wake up. Coffee is swilled and eggs are swallowed. Everybody goes about the business of acting like their lives matter and then, no matter how important the events of the day end up being, the sun invariably sets. The sun rose before the soldiers stormed Omaha Beach on D-Day, and the sun set after Archduke Franz Ferdinand was killed. Sunrises and sunsets are real jerks about putting things in perspective.
Imagination is the one weapon in the war against reality.
Reality is a crutch for people who can't cope with drugs.
Reality is something you rise above.
I've wrestled with reality for 35 years, Doctor, and I'm happy to state I finally won out over it.
Everything you can imagine is real.
Reality is that which, when you stop believing in it, doesn't go away.
Humankind cannot stand very much reality.
A man always has two reasons for what he does-a good one and the real one.
Reason has always existed, but not always in a reasonable form.
Do not banish reason for inequality; but let your reason serve to make the truth appear where it seems hid, and hide the false seems true.
Every why hath a wherefore.
His reasons are as two grains of wheat his in two bushels of chaff: you shall seek all day ere you find them, and when you have them, they are not worth the search.
Many that are not mad have, sure, more lack of reason.
Strong reasons make strong actions.
Sure, he that made us with such large discourse, looking before and after, gave us not that capability and god-like reason to fust in us unus'd.
Man is so made that he can only find relaxation from one kind of labor by taking up another.
To be able to fill leisure intelligently is the last product of civilization, and at present very few people have reached this level.
This art of resting the mind and the power of dismissing from it all care and worry is probably one of the secrets of energy in our great men.
Acquire inner peace and a multitude will find their salvation near you.
Nothing is permanent in this wicked world - not even our troubles.
Sometimes the cure for restlessness is rest.
Put duties aside at least an hour before bed and perform soothing, quiet activities that will help you relax.
No matter how much pressure you feel at work, if you could find ways to relax for at least five minutes every hour, you'd be more productive.
There is no need to go to India or anywhere else to find peace. You will find that deep place of silence right in your room, your garden or even your bathtub.
We have to fight them daily, like fleas, those many small worries about the morrow, for they sap our energies.
Light be the earth upon you, lightly rest.
When we are unable to find tranquility within ourselves, it is useless to seek it elsewhere.
During [these] periods of relaxation after concentrated intellectual activity, the intuitive mind seems to take over and can produce the sudden clarifying insights which give so much joy and delight.
What's the use of worrying? It never was worthwhile.
He enjoys true leisure who has time to improve his soul's estate.
If a man insisted always on being serious, and never allowed himself a bit of fun and relaxation, he would go mad or become unstable without knowing it.
We spend most of our time and energy in a kind of horizontal thinking. We move along the surface of things [but] there are times when we stop. We sit still. We lose ourselves in a pile of leaves or its memory. We listen and breezes from a whole other world begin to whisper.
To sit in the shade on a fine day, and look upon verdure is the most perfect refreshment.
Never lose sight of this important truth, that no one can be truly great until he has gained a knowledge of himself, a knowledge which can only be acquired by occasional retirement.
I take it that what all men are really after is some form or perhaps only some formula of peace.
If you can attain repose and calm, believe that you have seized happiness.
Besides the noble art of getting things done, there is a nobler art of leaving things undone. The wisdom of life consists in the elimination of nonessentials.
Stress is an ignorant state. It believes that everything is an emergency. Nothing is that important.
Before you agree to do anything that might add even the smallest amount of stress to your life, ask yourself: What is my truest intention? Give yourself time to let a yes resound within you. When it's right, I guarantee that your entire body will feel it.
Take rest; a field that has rested gives a bountiful crop.
Learning to ignore things is one of the great paths to inner peace.
Working in the garden...gives me a profound feeling of inner peace.
Sometimes I sits and thinks, and sometimes I just sits.
The time to relax is when you don't have time for it.
When I do good, I feel good; when I do bad, I feel bad, and that is my religion.
My religion consists of a humble admiration of the illimitable superior spirit who reveals himself in the slight details we are able to perceive with our frail and feeble mind.
Science without religion is lame, religion without science is blind.
I won't take my religion from any man who never works except with his mouth.
I am determined that my children shall be brought up in their father's religion, if they can find out what it is.
It is a fine thing to establish one's own religion in one's heart, not to be dependent on tradition and second-hand ideals. Life will seem to you, later, not a lesser, but a greater thing.
Rational arguments don't usually work on religious people. Otherwise, there wouldn't be religious people.
Clergymen have much the same in their breeches as other men.
The opposite of the religious fanatic is not the fanatical atheist but the gentle cynic who cares not whether there is a god or not.
Everyone ought to worship God according to his own inclinations, and not to be constrained by force.
The secret of a good sermon is to have a good beginning and a good ending, then having the two as close together as possible.
For centuries, theologians have been explaining the unknowable in terms of the-not-worth-knowing.
I've often thought the Bible should have a disclaimer in the front saying this is fiction.
A myth is a religion in which no one any longer believes.
Everybody likes to go their own way--to choose their own time and manner of devotion.
It will, I believe, be everywhere found, that as the clergy are, or are not what they ought to be, so are the rest of the nation.
The home of a clergyman is constantly judged by its parishioners. If it is too large and richly decorated, it is the subject of jealousy. If it is too small and humble, it is the subject of scorn. If it is too clean and orderly, it is considered a museum where charity is untouched and kept in a box. If it is slovenly, it is the subject of disgust.
Such evil deeds could religion prompt.
I would no more quarrel with a man because of his religion than I would because of his art.
The true meaning of religion is thus not simply morality, but morality touched by emotion.
Those who seek consolation in existing churches often pay for their peace of mind with a tacit agreement to ignore a great deal of what is known about the way the world works.
The true mystery of the world is the visible, not the invisible.
Never confuse the faith with the supposedly faithful.
The only time anyone's admitted they were a Christian before was when they were busy telling me why they're better than me.
The more I study religions the more I am convinced that man never worshipped anything but himself.
To believe in God or in a guiding force because someone tells you to is the height of stupidity. We are given senses to receive our information within. With our own eyes we see, and with our own skin we feel. With our intelligence, it is intended that we understand. But each person must puzzle it out for himself or herself.
Whatever God's dream about man may be, it seems certain it cannot come true unless man cooperates.
With or without religion, you would have good people doing good things and evil people doing evil things. But for good people to do evil things, that takes religion.
Say nothing of my religion. It is known to God and myself alone. Its evidence before the world is to be sought in my life: if it has been honest and dutiful to society the religion which has regulated it cannot be a bad one.
There are two modes of establishing our reputation: to be praised by honest men, and to be abused by rogues. It is best, however, to secure the former, because it will invariably be accompanied by the latter.
You can't build a reputation on what you are going to do.
Propriety was a rigid master, but one that must be obeyed if one wanted to keep a sterling reputation.
A good name, like good will, is got by many actions and lost by one.
Until you've lost your reputation, you never realize what a burden it was.
One can survive everything, nowadays, except death, and live down everything except a good reputation.
A good reputation is more valuable than money.
If I've learned one thing in the 14 years I've been a full-time cartoonist, it's that you can not let anyone else define your professionalism. It has to be a personal ethos to which you adhere despite third party influence or acceptance. The old measuring sticks for professionalism are going away and now more than ever it's time for independent creatives to set the bar. Set it high.
Regard your good name as the richest jewel you can possibly be possessed of - for credit is like fire; when once you have kindled it you may easily preserve it, but if you once extinguish it, you will find it an arduous task to rekindle it again. The way to gain a good reputation is to endeavor to be what you desire to appear.
Good name in man and woman, dear my lord,  Is the immediate jewel of their souls:  Who steals my purse steals trash; 'tis something, nothing;  'Twas mine, 'tis his, and has been slave to thousands;  But he that filches from me my good name  Robs me of that which not enriches him  And makes me poor indeed.
Good name in man and woman, dear my lord, Is the immediate jewel of their souls: Who steals my purse steals trash; 'tis something, nothing; 'Twas mine, 'tis his, and has been slave to thousands; But he that filches from me my good name Robs me of that which not enriches him And makes me poor indeed.
Oh, I have lost my reputation! I have lost the immortal part of myself, and what remains is bestial.
Reputation is an idle and most false imposition; oft got without merit, and lost without deserving.
The purest treasure mortal times afford is spotless reputation; that away, men are but gilded loam or painted clay.
He removes the greatest ornament of friendship, who takes away from it respect.
Respect yourself and others will respect you.
The more things a man is ashamed of, the more respectable he is.
Respect a man, he will do the more.
Civilization is a method of living, an attitude of equal respect for all men.
Loving yourself means caring enough to make the hard decisions in your life.
Self-respect is the cornerstone of all virtue.
Some people have so much respect for their superiors they have none left for themselves.
If you want to be respected, you must respect yourself.
The way to procure insults is to submit to them: a man meets with no more respect than he exacts.
That you may retain your self-respect, it is better to displease the people by doing what you know is right, than to temporarily please them by doing what you know is wrong.
You cannot escape the responsibility of tomorrow by evading it today.
To give up the task of reforming society is to give up one's responsibility as a free man.
One can pass on responsibility, but not the discretion that goes with it. 
I think of a hero as someone who understands the degree of responsibility that comes with his freedom.
The perfect bureaucrat everywhere is the man who manages to make no decisions and escape all responsibility.
There is a mysterious cycle in human events. To some generations much is given. Of other generations much is expected. This generation of Americans has a rendezvous with destiny.
Action springs not from thought, but from a readiness for responsibility. 
Liberty means responsibility. That is why most men dread it.
If you don't accept responsibility for your own actions, then you are forever chained to a position of defense.
So many new ideas are at first strange and horrible, though ultimately valuable that a very heavy responsibility rests upon those who would prevent their dissemination. 
There is an expiry date on blaming your parents for steering you in the wrong direction. The moment you are old enough to take the wheel, the responsibility lies with you.
In every child who is born under no matter what circumstances and of no matter what parents, the potentiality of the human race is born again, and in him, too, once more, and each of us, our terrific responsibility toward human life: toward the utmost idea of goodness, of the horror of terrorism, and of God.
Character - the willingness to accept responsibility for one's own life - is the source from which self respect springs.
I believe that every right implies a responsibility; every opportunity, an obligation; every possession, a duty.
Taking responsibility gives us power and control, because when we recognize the relationship between our choices and their consequences, then the next time we don’t like a consequence we can make a different choice.
The more freedom we enjoy, the greater the responsibility we bear, toward others as well as ourselves.
We are at the very beginning of time for the human race. It is not unreasonable that we grapple with problems. But there are tens of thousands of years in the future. Our responsibility is to do what we can, learn what we can, improve the solutions, and pass them on.
The price of greatness is responsibility.
I tasted too what was called the sweet of revenge - but it was transient, it expired even with the object, that provoked it.
There is no revenge so complete as forgiveness.
An eye for an eye makes the whole world blind.
If an injury has to be done to a man it should be so severe that his vengeance need not be feared.
Life being what it is, one dreams of revenge.
Nothing inspires forgiveness quite like revenge.
In taking revenge, a man is but even with his enemy; but in passing it over, he is superior.
Revenge is a kind of wild justice, which the more man's nature runs to the more ought law to weed it out.
Live well. It is the greatest revenge.
The first duty of a revolutionary is to get away with it.
Poverty is the parent of revolution and crime.
Revolution is not a onetime event.
The most radical revolutionary will become a conservative the day after the revolution.
Those who make peaceful revolution impossible will make violent revolution inevitable.
The most important scientific revolutions all include, as their only common feature, the dethronement of human arrogance from one pedestal after another of previous convictions about our centrality in the cosmos.
And the day came when the risk to remain tight in a bud was more painful than the risk it took to blossom.
I guess what I'm trying to say is, I don't think you can measure life in terms of years. I think longevity doesn't necessarily have anything to do with happiness. I mean happiness comes from facing challenges and going out on a limb and taking risks. If you're not willing to take a risk for something you really care about, you might as well be dead.
Life is a risk.
If you don't risk anything you risk even more.
Take calculated risks. That is quite different from being rash.
First weigh the considerations, then take the risks.
Great deeds are usually wrought at great risks.
The policy of being too cautious is the greatest risk of all.
What you risk reveals what you value.
Be wary of the man who urges an action in which he himself incurs no risk.
There are risks and costs to a program of action. But they are far less than the long-range risks and costs of comfortable inaction.
If you're never scared or embarrassed or hurt, it means you never take any chances.
Risk! Risk anything! Care no more for the opinions of others, for those voices. Do the hardest thing on earth for you. Act for yourself. Face the truth.
I don't think about risks much. I just do what I want to do. If you gotta go, you gotta go.
In order for people to be happy, sometimes they have to take risks. It's true these risks can put them in danger of being hurt.
It seems to me that people have vast potential. Most people can do extraordinary things if they have the confidence or take the risks. Yet most people don't. They sit in front of the telly and treat life as if it goes on forever.
To win without risk is to triumph without glory.
The universe will reward you for taking risks on its behalf.
Our lives improve only when we take chances - and the first and most difficult risk we can take is to be honest with ourselves.
We started off trying to set up a small anarchist community, but people wouldn't obey the rules.
It's not enough to create magic. You have to create a price for magic, too. You have to create rules.
The golden rule is that there are no golden rules.
One of the best rules in conversation is, never to say a thing which any of the company can reasonably wish had been left unsaid.
It is much easier to break the rules when one s surrounded by strangers. One does not know any of them, so one cannot really care for their opinion.
Play by the rules, but be ferocious.
Rules are just helpful guidelines for stupid people who can't make up their own minds.
Here's to the crazy ones, the misfits, the rebels, the troublemakers, the round pegs in the square holes... the ones who see things differently -- they're not fond of rules... You can quote them, disagree with them, glorify or vilify them, but the only thing you can't do is ignore them because they change things... they push the human race forward, and while some may see them as the crazy ones, we see genius, because the ones who are crazy enough to think that they can change the world, are the ones who do.
Hell, there are no rules here-- we're trying to accomplish something.
There are three rules for writing the novel. Unfortunately, no one knows what they are.
In a mad world only the mad are sane.
Insanity: doing the same thing over and over again and expecting different results.
The difference between insanity and genius is success.
The knowing, I told myself, is only a vapor of the mind, and yet it can wreck havok with one's sanity.
Sometimes the mind, for reasons we don't necessarily understand, just decides to go to the store for a quart of milk.
Insanity in individuals is something rare - but in groups, parties, nations and epochs, it is the rule.
There is always some madness in love. But there is also always some reason in madness.
Correct me if I'm wrong, but hasn't the fine line between sanity and madness gotten finer?
Ordinarily he was insane, but he had lucid moments when he was merely stupid.
Truly great madness cannot be achieved without significant intelligence.
When dealing with the insane, the best method is to pretend to be sane.
I hate to advocate drugs, alcohol, violence, or insanity to anyone, but they've always worked for me.
Part of being sane, is being a little bit crazy.
Sanity calms, but madness is more interesting.
I think that maybe in every company today there is always at least one person who is going crazy slowly.
A neurosis is a secret that you don't know you are keeping.
It is no measure of health to be well adjusted to a profoundly sick society.
I don't really trust a sane person.
There's a fine line between genius and insanity. I have erased this line.
The statistics on sanity are that one out of every four Americans is suffering from some form of mental illness. Think of your three best friends. If they're okay, then it's you.
You're only given a little spark of madness. You mustn't lose it.
There is only one difference between a madman and me. I am not mad.
There is no great genius without some touch of madness.
Joel: Ed, are you hallucinating? Ed: Oh, yeah, but not right now.
Howard Hughes was able to afford the luxury of madness, like a man who not only thinks he is Napoleon but hires an army to prove it.
Dreaming permits each and every one of us to be quietly and safely insane every night of our lives.
Canst thou not minister to a mind diseased,  Pluck from the memory a rooted sorrow...  And with some sweet oblivious antidote  Cleanse the stuff'd bosom of that perilous stuff  Which weighs upon the heart?
Fetter strong madness in a silken thread.
Her madness hath the oddest frame of sense, such a dependency of thing on thing, as e'er I heard in madness.
How comes it, that thou art then estranged from thyself?
Science can only ascertain what is, but not what should be, and outside of its domain value judgements of all kinds remain necessary.
Science without religion is lame, religion without science is blind.
When a distinguished but elderly scientist states that something is possible, he is almost certainly right. When he states that something is impossible, he is very probably wrong.
Science has proof without any certainty. Creationists have certainty without any proof.
Science may set limits to knowledge, but should not set limits to imagination.
I maintain there is much more wonder in science than in pseudoscience. And in addition, to whatever measure this term has any meaning, science has the additional virtue, and it is not an inconsiderable one, of being true.
All science is either physics or stamp collecting.
Science is nothing but developed perception, interpreted intent, common sense rounded out and minutely articulated.
Nothing shocks me. I'm a scientist.
Science is facts; just as houses are made of stones, so is science made of facts; but a pile of stones is not a house and a collection of facts is not necessarily science.
There are in fact two things, science and opinion; the former begets knowledge, the latter ignorance.
Science is organized knowledge. Wisdom is organized life.
The most exciting phrase to hear in science, the one that heralds new discoveries, is not 'Eureka!' (I found it!) but 'That's funny ...'
Perfect as the wing of a bird may be, it will never enable the bird to fly if unsupported by the air. Facts are the air of science. Without them a man of science can never rise.
That is the essence of science: ask an impertinent question, and you are on your way to the pertinent answer.
It is a good morning exercise for a research scientist to discard a pet hypothesis every day before breakfast. It keeps him young.
The cloning of humans is on most of the lists of things to worry about from Science, along with behaviour control, genetic engineering, transplanted heads, computer poetry and the unrestrained growth of plastic flowers.
There are no such things as applied sciences, only applications of science.
As an adolescent I aspired to lasting fame, I craved factual certainty, and I thirsted for a meaningful vision of human life - so I became a scientist. This is like becoming an archbishop so you can meet girls.
I am among those who think that science has great beauty. A scientist in his laboratory is not only a technician: he is also a child placed before natural phenomena which impress him like a fairy tale.
We must not forget that when radium was discovered no one knew that it would prove useful in hospitals. The work was one of pure science. And this is a proof that scientific work must not be considered from the point of view of the direct usefulness of it. It must be done for itself, for the beauty of science, and then there is always the chance that a scientific discovery may become like the radium a benefit for humanity.
There is something fascinating about science. One gets such wholesale returns of conjecture out of such a trifling investment of fact.
Our scientific power has outrun our spiritual power. We have guided missiles and misguided men.
A new scientific truth does not triumph by convincing its opponents and making them see the light, but rather because its opponents eventually die, and a new generation grows up that is familiar with it.
As soon as questions of will or decision or reason or choice of action arise, human science is at a loss.
In science one tries to tell people, in such a way as to be understood by everyone, something that no one ever knew before. But in poetry, it's the exact opposite.
I believe that a scientist looking at nonscientific problems is just as dumb as the next guy.
Philosophers say a great deal about what is absolutely necessary for science, and it is always, so far as one can see, rather naive, and probably wrong.
Science is one thing, wisdom is another. Science is an edged tool, with which men play like children, and cut their own fingers.
In science the credit goes to the man who convinces the world, not the man to whom the idea first occurs.
To him that you tell your secret you resign your liberty. 
Three may keep a secret, if two of them are dead.
No one gossips about other people's secret virtues.
The best way to divulge a secret is to tell someone not to say anything about it.
All secrets are deep. All secrets become dark. That's in the nature of secrets.
If you have to keep something secret it's because you shouldn't be doing it in the first place!
Look in the mirror. The face that pins you with its double gaze reveals a chastening secret.
The first rule of life is to reveal nothing, to be exceptionally cautious in what you say, in whatever company you may find yourself. If you have a secret, you have only to whisper it to your dearest friend with the strictest injunction that it will go no further, and within half a day the story is all over town, and when you do make what would seem to be a perfectly sensible remark, you will find it reported in the most grotesque form, thus incurring no end of criticism to rebound upon you.
Trade your secrets and become who you are.
There are no secrets better kept than the secrets that everybody guesses.
If you reveal your secrets to the wind you should not blame the wind for revealing them to the trees.
A neurosis is a secret that you don't know you are keeping.
The face is the mirror of the mind, and eyes without speaking confess the secrets of the heart.
Secret thoughts and open countenance will go safely over the whole world.
The superior man, when resting in safety, does not forget that danger may come. When in a state of security he does not forget the possibility of ruin. When all is orderly, he does not forget that disorder may come. Thus his person is not endangered, and his States and all their clans are preserved.
Better be despised for too anxious apprehensions, than ruined by too confident security.
There is no security on this earth, there is only opportunity.
There is no security on this earth; there is only opportunity.
Life is either a daring adventure or nothing. Security does not exist in nature, nor do the children of men as a whole experience it. Avoiding danger is no safer in the long run than exposure.
Security is mostly a superstition. It does not exist in nature.... Life is either a daring adventure or nothing.
Too many people are thinking of security instead of opportunity. They seem more afraid of life than death.
The most certain test by which we judge whether a country is really free is the amount of security enjoyed by minorities.
Security is a kind of death.
No one can build his security upon the nobleness of another person.
The reward for doing right is mostly an internal phenomenon: self-respect, dignity, integrity, and self- esteem.
So much is a man worth as he esteems himself.
I think high self-esteem is overrated. A little low self-esteem is actually quite good Maybe you're not the best, so you should work a little harder.
A man cannot be comfortable without his own approval.
Self-esteem is the reputation we acquire with ourselves.
If you must love your neighbor as yourself, it is at least as fair to love yourself as your neighbor.
To be stupid, selfish, and have good health are three requirements for happiness, though if stupidity is lacking, all is lost.
Manifest plainness,Embrace simplicity,Reduce selfishness,Have few desires.
Forgiveness is almost a selfish act because of its immense benefits to the one who forgives.
Selfishness is not living as one wishes to live, it is asking others to live as one wishes to live.
Glory built on selfish principles is shame and guilt.
Be alert to give service. What counts a great deal in life is what we do for others.
Great services are not canceled by one act or by one single error.
While you are not able to serve men, how can you serve spirits [of the dead]?...While you do not know life, how can you know about death?
Sow good services; sweet remembrances will grow them.
I've come to believe that each of us has a personal calling that's as unique as a fingerprint - and that the best way to succeed is to discover what you love and then find a way to offer it to others in the form of service, working hard, and also allowing the energy of the universe to lead you.
Be silent as to services you have rendered, but speak of favours you have received.
It is with our passions, as it is with fire and water, they are good servants but bad masters.
Confidence is the sexiest thing a woman can have. It's much sexier than any body part.
The happiness of a man in this life does not consist in the absence but in the mastery of his passions.
Any piece of clothing can be sexy with a quietly passionate woman inside it.
Instead of fulfilling the promise of infinite orgasmic bliss, sex in the America of the feminine mystique is becoming a strangely joyless national compulsion, if not a contemptuous mockery.
Women need a reason to have sex. Men just need a place.
Mortal lovers must not try to remain at the first step; for lasting passion is the dream of a harlot and from it we wake in despair.
It's just human. We all have the jungle inside of us. We all have wants and needs and desires, strange as they may seem. If you stop to think about it, we're all pretty creative, cooking up all these fantasies. it's like a kind of poetry.
I'm too shy to express my sexual needs except over the phone to people I don't know.
I can remember when the air was clean and sex was dirty.
Sexually,we are all competing for the same seat on the bus and the thing that holds it together is the tightly held conceit that we are all sexual gods. How can I believe in my own uniqueness when there's a cat out there exactly the same as me?
A man can sleep around, no questions asked, but if a woman makes nineteen or twenty mistakes she's a tramp.
In English, we don't have a word for people who aren't virgins. What the non-virgin lexical gap really made me think was that our obsession with sexual purity is such that once you are no longer this THING, you are indescribable.
Sexuality is important, but it's certainly not the most interesting or important thing happening to you right now. We live in a world that tells us that there are only two important things. One is the acquisition of goods and the other is either the acquisition or avoidance of sex, but it turns out that the question of who's a virgin and who's a virgout is not the most interesting question.
In America sex is an obsession, in other parts of the world it is a fact.
Does it really matter what these affectionate people do-- so long as they don’t do it in the streets and frighten the horses!
One thing I've learned in all these years is not to make love when you really don't feel it; there's probably nothing worse you can do to yourself than that.
Life is a sexually transmitted disease.
Desperate is not a sexual preference.
I know love and lust don't always keep the same company.
But seduction isn’t making someone do what they don’t want to do. Seduction is enticing someone into doing what they secretly want to do already.
I know nothing about sex because I was always married.
Silence is a text easy to misread.
'Tis better to be silent and be thought a fool, than to speak and remove all doubt.
Better to remain silent and be thought a fool than to speak out and remove all doubt.
He who does not know how to be silent will not know how to speak.
The eternal silence of these infinite spaces fills me with dread.
Oppression can only survive through silence.
I think the first virtue is to restrain the tongue; he approaches nearest to gods who knows how to be silent, even though he is in the right.
Silence is more musical than any song.
A fair request should be followed by the deed in silence.
My personal hobbies are reading, listening to music, and silence.
Learn to get in touch with the silence within yourself and know that everything in this life has a purpose.
There is no need to go to India or anywhere else to find peace. You will find that deep place of silence right in your room, your garden or even your bathtub.
Silence is the most perfect expression of scorn.
With silence favor me. (Favete Linguis)
A good word is an easy obligation; but not to speak ill, requires only our silence, which costs nothing.
Silence is one of the hardest arguments to refute.
I don't want to talk as much. It's nicer to think dear, pretty thoughts and keep them in one's heart, like treasures. I don't like to have them laughed at or wondered over.
The most profound statements are often said in silence.
In the attitude of silence the soul finds the path in a clearer light, and what is elusive and deceptive resolves itself into crystal clearness. Our life is a long and arduous quest after Truth.
Well-timed silence hath more eloquence than speech.
In the end, we will remember not the words of our enemies, but the silence of our friends.
Our lives begin to end the day we become silent about things that matter.
In silence man can most readily preserve his integrity.
Silence is golden when you can't think of a good answer.
Not merely an absence of noise, Real Silence begins when a reasonable being withdraws from the noise in order to find peace and order in his inner sanctuary.
I have often regretted my speech, never my silence.
It is better wither to be silent, or to say things of more value than silence. Sooner throw a pearl at hazard than an idle or useless word; and do not say a little in many words, but a great deal in a few.
The cruelest lies are often told in silence.
Nothing is so good for an ignorant man as silence; and if he was sensible of this he would not be ignorant.
Silence propagates itself, and the longer talk has been suspended, the more difficult it is to find anything to say.
Everything should be made as simple as possible, but not one bit simpler.
Seek simplicity, and distrust it.
It is simplicity that makes the uneducated more effective than the educated when addressing popular audiences.
Go confidently in the direction of your dreams! Live the life you've imagined. As you simplify your life, the laws of the universe will be simpler.
Simplicity is the peak of civilization.
Nothing is as simple as we hope it will be.
Manifest plainness,Embrace simplicity,Reduce selfishness,Have few desires.
I adore simple pleasures. They are the last refuge of the complex.
It is dangerous to be sincere unless you are also stupid.
The secret of success is sincerity. Once you can fake that you've got it made.
Judge thyself with the judgment of sincerity, and thou will judge others with the judgment of charity.
I am not sincere, even when I say I am not.
Sincerity is the way of Heaven.
A little sincerity is a dangerous thing, and a great deal of it is absolutely fatal.
Laugh and the world laughs with you, snore and you sleep alone.
It is better to sleep on things beforehand than lie awake about them afterward.
Early to bed and early to rise makes a man healthy, wealthy, and wise.
If you can't sleep, then get up and do something instead of lying there and worrying. It's the worry that gets you, not the loss of sleep.
Life is something that happens when you can't get to sleep.
There is a time for many words, and there is also a time for sleep.
To achieve the impossible dream, try going to sleep.
People who say they sleep like a baby usually don't have one.
Not being able to sleep is terrible. You have the misery of having partied all night... without the satisfaction.
I have never taken any exercise except sleeping and resting.
Oh sleep! It is a gentle thing,  Beloved from pole to pole.
When I woke up this morning my girlfriend asked me, 'Did you sleep good?' I said 'No, I made a few mistakes.'
I guess staying up late is good preparation for sweet dreams.
[Sleep is] the golden chain that ties health and our bodies together.
Death's brother, Sleep.
A great perturbation in nature, to receive at once the benefit of sleep and do the effects of watching!
Care keeps his watch in every old man's eye,  And where care lodges, sleep will never lie;  But where unbruised youth with unstuff'd brain  Doth couch his limbs, there golden sleep doth reign.
He that sleeps feels not the tooth-ache.
Methought I heard a voice cry, "Sleep no more! Macbeth does murder sleep!"- the innocent sleep.
O sleep, O gentle sleep, nature's soft nurse, how have I frighted thee, that thou no more wilt weigh my eyelids down, and steep my senses in forgetfulness.
O sleep, thou ape of death, lie dull upon her and be her sense but as a monument, thus in a chapel lying.
Shake off this downy sleep, death's counterfeit, and look on death itself.
Sleep that knits up the ravell'd sleave of care, the death of each day's life, sore labour's bath, balm of hurt minds, great nature's second course, chief nourisher in life's feast.
Sleep, that sometimes shuts up sorrow's eye, steal me awhile from mine own company.
A lot of people like snow. I find it to be an unnecessary freezing of water.
In the bleak midwinter Frosty wind made moan, Earth stood hard as iron, Water like a stone; Snow had fallen, snow on snow, Snow on snow, In the bleak midwinter, Long ago.
The aging process has you firmly in its grasp if you never get the urge to throw a snowball.
Whose woods these are I think I know. His house is in the village though; He will not see me stopping here To watch his woods fill up with snow.
To give up the task of reforming society is to give up one's responsibility as a free man.
He who is unable to live in society, or who has no need because he is sufficient for himself, must be either a beast or a god.
Society, my dear, is like salt water, good to swim in but hard to swallow.
A society of sheep must in time beget a government of wolves. 
We live in a society exquisitely dependent on science and technology, in which hardly anyone knows anything about science and technology.
A nation is a society united by a delusion about its ancestry and by common hatred of its neighbors.
The nature of society is largely determined by the direction in which talent and ambition flow-by the tilt of the social landscape.
Be very circumspect in the choice of thy company. In the society of thine equals thou shalt enjoy more pleasure; in the society of thy superiors thou shalt find more profit. To be the best in the company is the way to grow worse.
What can you say about a society that says that God is dead and Elvis is alive?
But society has now fairly got the better of individuality; and the danger which threatens human nature is not the excess, but the deficiency, of personal impulses and preferences.
Everyone who receives the protection of society owes a return for the benefit.
It is no measure of health to be well adjusted to a profoundly sick society.
The needs of society determine its ethics.
Do not speak ill of society, Algie. Only people who can't get in do that.
I'm against a homogenized society, because I want the cream to rise.
 There is no nonsense so gross that society will not, at some time, make a doctrine of it and defend it with every weapon of communal stupidity.
Man seeketh in society comfort, use and protection.
We must beware of trying to build a society in which nobody counts for anything except a politician or an official, a society where enterprise gains no reward and thrift no privileges.
Let thy speech be short, comprehending much in a few words.
Bore: one who has the power of speech but not the capacity for conversation.
Free speech carries with it some freedom to listen.
Thought is the fountain of speech.
Great wisdom is generous; petty wisdom is contentious. Great speech is impassioned, small speech cantankerous.
The superior man is modest in his speech, but exceeds in his actions.
All speech is vain and empty unless it be accompanied by action.
Today's public figures can no longer write their own speeches or books, and there is some evidence that they can't read them either.
What this country needs is more free speech worth listening to.
Readiness of speech is often inability to hold the tongue.
The First Amendment is often inconvenient. But that is besides the point. Inconvenience does not absolve the government of its obligation to tolerate speech.
Speak when you are angry--and you will make the best speech you'll ever regret.
It usually takes more than three weeks to prepare a good impromptu speech.
Well-timed silence hath more eloquence than speech.
Be a craftsman in speech that thou mayest be strong, for the strength of one is the tongue, and speech is mightier than all fighting.
Do not fight verbosity with words: speech is given to all, intelligence to few.
Tears at times have all the weight of speech.
I have often regretted my speech, never my silence.
Speech is a mirror of the soul: as a man speaks, so is he.
In anger we should refrain both from speech and action.
Much talking is the cause of danger. Silence is the means of avoiding misfortune. The talkative parrot is shut up in a cage. Other birds, without speech, fly freely about.
It is a great thing to know the season for speech and the season for silence.
Speech is the mirror of the mind. (Imago Animi Sermo Est)
Where the speech is corrupted, the mind is also.
Discretion in speech is more than eloquence.
Look wise, say nothing, and grunt. Speech was given to conceal thought.
Where there is a great deal of free speech there is always a certain amount of foolish speech.
Much speech is one thing, well-timed speech is another.
Speech is human, silence is divine, yet also brutish and dead: therefore we must learn both arts.
Sport is imposing order on what was chaos.
Some people think football is a matter of life and death. I don't like that attitude. I can assure them it is much more serious than that.
Anybody who watches three games of football in a row should be declared brain dead.
Football is a mistake. It combines the two worst elements of American life. Violence and committee meetings.
Sports serve society by providing vivid examples of excellence.
For when the One Great Scorer comes To write against your name, He marks-not that you won or lost- But how you played the game.
Sports do not build character. They reveal it.
Nobody in the game of football should be called a genius. A genius is somebody like Norman Einstein.
I started thinking about little kids putting a cylindrical peg through a circular hole, and how they do it over and over again for months when they figure it out, and how basketball was basically just a slightly more aerobic version of that same exercise.
It's not so important who starts the game but who finishes it.
If it weren't for baseball, many kids wouldn't know what a millionaire looked like.
For people to judge a man's worth and his very manhood according to the way he feels about sport, and not to recognize it for the piddly, inconsequential goings on that it really is...
I went to a fight the other night, and a hockey game broke out.
Not every age is fit for childish sports.
A good hockey player plays where the puck is. A great hockey player plays where the puck is going to be.
If all the year were playing holidays; To sport would be as tedious as to work.
Desire is the most important factor in the success of any athlete.
Baseball is 90% mental, the other half is physical.
If we had no winter, the spring would not be so pleasant: if we did not sometimes taste of adversity, prosperity would not be so welcome.
[Spring is] when life's alive in everything.
If there comes a little thaw,  Still the air is chill and raw,  Here and there a patch of snow, Dirtier than the ground below,  Dribbles down a marshy flood;  Ankle-deep you stick in mud In the meadows while you sing,  "This is Spring."
Well, spring sprang. We've had our state of grace and our little gift of sanctioned madness, courtesy of Mother Nature. Thanks, Gaia. Much obliged. I guess it's time to get back to that daily routine of living we like to call normal.
Listen, can you hear it? Spring's sweet cantata. The strains of grass pushing through the snow. The song of buds swelling on the vine. The tender timpani of a baby robin's heart. Spring.
Spring is when you feel like whistling even with a shoe full of slush.
A little Madness in the Spring Is wholesome even for the King.
To be interested in the changing seasons is a happier state of mind than to be hopelessly in love with spring.
[Spring is] a true reconstructionist.
If winter comes, can spring be far behind? 
An optimist is the human personification of spring.
Winter is on my head, but eternal spring is in my heart.
In the spring time, the only pretty ring time, when birds do sing... sweet lovers love the spring.
O, how this spring of love resembleth The uncertain glory of an April day!
There are three kinds of lies: lies, damned lies, and statistics.
USA Today has come out with a new survey - apparently, three out of every four people make up 75% of the population.
Statistician: A man who believes figures don't lie, but admits that under analysis some of them won't stand up either.
Statistics: The only science that enables different experts using the same figures to draw different conclusions.
Smoking is one of the leading causes of statistics.
I could prove God statistically.
A single death is a tragedy; a million deaths is a statistic.
Small minds are much distressed by little things. Great minds see them all but are not upset by them.
If you ask what is the single most important key to longevity, I would have to say it is avoiding worry, stress and tension. And if you didn't ask me, I'd still have to say it.
I deal with stress in two ways because there are two kinds of stress. There's stress that you can take care of and there's stress that you can't. The first one, I take care of it as fast as possible, because putting it off always makes it worse. Things that I can't fix? I think about the fact that I can't fix them. I think about why I can't fix them and I come to terms with the fact that this is a problem that I'm not going to overcome and that the world is not a wish granting factory.
Reality is the leading cause of stress amongst those in touch with it.
If you are distressed by anything external, the pain is not due to the thing itself, but to your estimate of it; and this you have the power to revoke at any moment.
It is how people respond to stress that determines whether they will profit from misfortune or be miserable.
Stress is an ignorant state. It believes that everything is an emergency. Nothing is that important.
Before you agree to do anything that might add even the smallest amount of stress to your life, ask yourself: What is my truest intention? Give yourself time to let a yes resound within you. When it's right, I guarantee that your entire body will feel it.
Throw out an alarming alarm clock. If the ring is loud and strident, you're waking up to instant stress. You shouldn't be bullied out of bed, just reminded that it's time to start your day.
If you had to define stress, it would not be far off if you said it was the process of living. The process of living is the process of having stress imposed on you and reacting to it.
Exercise relieves stress. Nothing relieves exercise.
Only two things are infinite, the universe and human stupidity, and I'm not sure about the former.
Genius may have its limitations, but stupidity is not thus handicapped.
Talk sense to a fool and he calls you foolish.
Get all the fools on your side and you can be elected to anything.
Against stupidity the gods themselves contend in vain.
It is dangerous to be sincere unless you are also stupid.
To be stupid, selfish, and have good health are three requirements for happiness, though if stupidity is lacking, all is lost.
The two most common elements in the universe are Hydrogen and stupidity.
Ordinarily he was insane, but he had lucid moments when he was merely stupid.
There are more fools in the world than there are people.
There is nothing worse than aggressive stupidity.
Insanity is just what we call stupidity when it doesn't make sense.
Nothing in all the world is more dangerous than sincere ignorance and conscientious stupidity.
If there are no stupid questions, then what kind of questions do stupid people ask? Do they get smart just in time to ask questions?
Strange as it seems, no amount of learning can cure stupidity, and higher education positively fortifies it.
Artificial Intelligence is no match for natural stupidity.
Everyone is entitled to be stupid, but some abuse the privilege.
Fools rush in where fools have been before.
Never attribute to malice what can be adequately explained by stupidity.
To succeed in the world it is not enough to be stupid, you must also be well-mannered.
Lord, what fools these mortals be!
Always bear in mind that your own resolution to succeed is more important than any one thing.
If A is success in life, then A equals x plus y plus z. Work is x; y is play; and z is keeping your mouth shut.
Try not to become a man of success but rather to become a man of value.
A great secret of success is to go through life as a man who never gets used up.
A discovery is said to be an accident meeting a prepared mind.
Stop seeing the obstacles you face as reasons why you can't do something. See them as a reason why you can. And celebrate your accomplishments on a daily basis.
To think about your life is to create it. You have to take ownership of where you are right now and know where you want to go before you can get there. Keep collecting evidence for your success. You can believe it, and you can be it.
To follow, without halt, one aim: There's the secret of success.
If your success is not on your own terms, if it looks good to the world but does not feel good in your heart, it is not success at all.
Success is the necessary misfortune of life, but it is only to the very unfortunate that it comes early.
It is possible to fail in many ways...while to succeed is possible only in one way.
Of course there is no formula for success except perhaps an unconditional acceptance of life and what it brings.
Find somebody to be successful for. Raise their hopes. Think of their needs.
I've come to embrace the notion that I haven't done enough in my life. I've come to confirm that one's title, even a title like president of the United States, says very little about how well one's life has been led. No matter how much you've done or how successful you've been, there's always more to do, always more to learn, and always more to achieve.
That's what building a body of work is all about. It's about the daily labor, the many individual acts, the choices large and small that add up over time, over a lifetime to a lasting legacy. It's about not being satisfied with the latest achievement, the latest gold star, because the one thing I know about a body of work is that it's never finished. It's cumulative. It deepens and expands with each day you give your best. You may have setbacks and you may have failures, but you're not done. You haven't even started.
The leaders we revere and the businesses that last are generally not the result of a narrow pursuit of popularity or personal advancement, but of devotion to some bigger purpose. That's the hallmark of real success. The other trapping of success might be the by product of this larger mission, but it can't be the central thing.
Why be a man when you can be a success?
I don't know the key to success, but the key to failure is trying to please everybody.
What's money? A man is a success if he gets up in the morning and goes to bed at night and in between does what he wants to do.
The person who makes a success of living is the one who see his goal steadily and aims for it unswervingly. That is dedication.
Nothing succeeds like the appearance of success.
There is only one success - to be able to spend your life in your own way.
There is only one success... to be able to spend your life in your own way, and not to give others absurd maddening claims upon it.
The man of virtue makes the difficulty to be overcome his first business, and success only a subsequent consideration.
Real success is finding your lifework in the work that you love.
Envy was just the tax you paid on success.
Success in business requires training and discipline and hard work. But if you're not frightened by these things, the opportunities are just as great today as they ever were.
Aim for success, not perfection. Never give up your right to be wrong, because then you will lose the ability to learn new things and move forward with your life.
We succeed only as we identify in life, or in war, or in anything else, a single overriding objective, and make all other considerations bend to that one objective.
To perceive is to suffer.
But penance need not be paid in suffering...It can be paid in forward motion. Correcting the mistake is a positive move, a nurturing move.
In the part of this universe that we know there is great injustice, and often the good suffer, and often the wicked prosper, and one hardly knows which of those is the more annoying.
Never to suffer would never to have been blessed.
I felt despair. Though it seems to me now there's two kinds of it: the sort that causes a person to surrender and then the sort I had which made me take risks and make plans.
I have found that it don't really matter if you're brought up fine or rough, but that it helps to have someone to spill your sorrows to.
But a somewhat more liberal and sympathetic examination of mankind will convince us that the cross is even older than the gibbet, that voluntary suffering was before and independent of compulsory; and in short that in most important matters a man has always been free to ruin himself if he chose.
Although the world is full of suffering, it is full also of the overcoming of it.
Character cannot be developed in ease and quiet. Only through experience of trial and suffering can the soul be strengthened, ambition inspired, and success achieved.
You desire to know the art of living, my friend? It is contained in one phrase: make use of suffering.
So long as little children are allowed to suffer, there is no true love in this world.
One does not love a place the less for having suffered in it, unless it has been all suffering, nothing but suffering.
Man has to suffer. When he has no real afflictions, he invents some.
A misery is not to be measured from the nature of the evil, but from the temper of the sufferer.
I have not yet met with a sorrow that could not be borne, nor with one who's passing did not leave me stronger.
Whenever evil befalls us, we ought to ask ourselves, after the first suffering, how we can turn it into good. So shall we take occasion, from one bitter root, to raise perhaps many flowers.
I cannot believe that the inscrutable universe turns on an axis of suffering; surely the strange beauty of the world must somewhere rest on pure joy!
Crying is the refuge of plain women, but the ruin of pretty ones.
People have a hard time letting go of their suffering. Out of a fear of the unknown, they prefer suffering that is familiar.
The truth that many people never understand, until it is too late, is that the more you try to avoid suffering the more you suffer because smaller and more insignificant things begin to torture you in proportion to your fear of being hurt.
The sufferings that fate inflicts on us should be borne with patience, what enemies inflict with manly courage.
Pain is inevitable; suffering is optional.
If suffer we must, let's suffer on the heights.
In the depth of winter, I finally learned that within me there lay an invincible summer.
One swallow does not make a summer.
There shall be eternal summer in the grateful heart.
Summer afternoon - Summer afternoon... the two most beautiful words in the English language.
Summer afternoon-summer afternoon; to me those have always been the two most beautiful words in the English language.
The tendinous part of the mind, so to speak, is more developed in winter; the fleshy, in summer. I should say winter had given the bone and sinew to literature, summer the tissues and the blood.
What a beautiful, sunny morning. It makes you happy to be alive, doesn't it? We can't let the sun outshine us! We have to beam, too!
The summer night is like a perfection of thought.
In summer, the song sings itself.
Shall I compare thee to a summer's day?  Thou art more lovely and more temperate:  Rough winds do shake the darling buds of May,  And summer's lease hath all too short a date.
Faith must have adequate evidence, else it is mere superstition.
I have only one superstition. I touch all the bases when I hit a home run.
Fear is the main source of superstition, and one of the main sources of cruelty. To conquer fear is the beginning of wisdom.
We do not destroy religion by destroying superstition.
A superstition is a premature explanation that overstays its time.
Security is mostly a superstition. It does not exist in nature.... Life is either a daring adventure or nothing.
Count Hermann Keyserling once said truly that the greatest American superstition was belief in facts.
Great ability develops and reveals itself increasingly with every new assignment.
Put yourself on view. This brings your talents to light.
Hide not your talents, they for use were made. What's a sun-dial in the shade?
If you have a talent, use it in every which way possible. Don't hoard it. Don't dole it out like a miser. Spend it lavishly like a millionaire intent on going broke.
Natural ability without education has more often attained to glory and virtue than education without natural ability.
Everyone has talent. What is rare is the courage to follow the talent to the dark place where it leads.
Work while you have the light. You are responsible for the talent that has been entrusted to you.
Use what talents you possess: the woods would be very silent if no birds sang there except those that sang best.
Appearance can always be changed, but the talent stays the same.
My focus has always been on talent over looks. This theme of people putting an emphasis on looks first has been a constant reminder throughout my life that most people don’t see things in the same way that I do.
The talent should speak for itself.
We believe that if men have the talent to invent need machines that put men out of work, they have the talent to put those men back to work.
It doesn't pay to be good at something unless you are the absolute best at it.
We are always more anxious to be distinguished for a talent which we do not possess, than to be praised for the fifteen which we do possess.
You have to have confidence in your ability, and then be tough enough to follow through.
Toil to make yourself remarkable by some talent or other.
Mediocrity knows nothing higher than itself, but talent instantly recognizes genius.
Getting ahead in a difficult profession requires avid faith in yourself. That is why some people with mediocre talent, but with great inner drive, go much further than people with vastly superior talent.
Whatever you are by nature, keep to it; never desert your line of talent. Be what nature intended you for and you will succeed.
The hardest thing in the world to understand is the income tax.
The best way to teach your kids about taxes is by eating 30% of their ice cream.
He who builds a better mousetrap these days runs into material shortages, patent-infringement suits, work stoppages, collusive bidding, discount discrimination--and taxes."
Unquestionably, there is progress. The average American now pays out twice as much in taxes as he formerly got in wages.
Income tax returns are the most imaginative fiction being written today.
The avoidance of taxes is the only intellectual pursuit that carries any reward.
When there is an income tax, the just man will pay more and the unjust less on the same amount of income.
The income tax has made more liars out of the American people than golf has.
I never teach my pupils. I only attempt to provide the conditions in which they can learn.
Experience teaches only the teachable.
The true teacher defends his pupils against his own personal influence.
The whole art of teaching is only the art of awakening the natural curiosity of young minds for the purpose of satisfying it afterwards.
Passive acceptance of the teacher's wisdom is easy to most boys and girls. It involves no effort of independent thought, and seems rational because the teacher knows more than his pupils; it is moreover the way to win the favour of the teacher unless he is a very exceptional man. Yet the habit of passive acceptance is a disastrous one in later life. It causes man to seek and to accept a leader, and to accept as a leader whoever is established in that position.
Teachers open the door. You enter by yourself.
Good teaching is one-fourth preparation and three-fourths theater.
He who can, does. He who cannot, teaches.
Teaching is not a lost art, but regard for teaching is a lost tradition.
If you would thoroughly know anything, teach it to others.
For every person who wants to teach there are approximately thirty people who don't want to learn--much.
For a list of all the ways technology has failed to improve the quality of life, please press three.
Any sufficiently advanced technology is indistinguishable from magic.
During my eighty-seven years I have witnessed a whole succession of technological revolutions. But none of them have done away with the need for character in the individual or the ability to think.
This is why I loved technology: if you used it right, it could give you power and privacy.
We make our gadgets our own by the way that we use them, with or without the permission of the manufacturer.
Technology is a way of organizing the universe so that man doesn't have to experience it.
If there is technological advance without social advance, there is, almost automatically, an increase in human misery.
Technology is dominated by two types of people: those who understand what they do not manage, and those who manage what they do not understand.
Humanity is acquiring all the right technology for all the wrong reasons.
For a successful technology, reality must take precedence over public relations, for Nature cannot be fooled.
There is an evil tendency underlying all our technology - the tendency to do what is reasonable even when it isn't any good.
Television is more interesting than people. If it were not, we would have people standing in the corners of our rooms.
Seeing a murder on television... can help work off one's antagonisms. And if you haven't any antagonisms, the commercials will give you some.
Television has done much for psychiatry by spreading information about it, as well as contributing to the need for it.
Television has proved that people will look at anything rather than each other.
Television is the first truly democratic culture - the first culture available to everybody and entirely governed by what the people want. The most terrifying thing is what people do want.
The one function TV news performs very well is that when there is no news we give it to you with the same emphasis as if there were.
Television enables you to be entertained in your home by people you wouldn't have in your home.
[The television is] an invention that permits you to be entertained in your living room by people you wouldn't have in your home.
MTV is the lava lamp of the 1980's.
I can think of nothing more boring for the American people than to have to sit in their living rooms for a whole half hour looking at my face on their television screens.
Dealing with network executives is like being nibbled to death by ducks.
TV is chewing gum for the eyes.
Imitation is the sincerest form of television.
Television is a new medium. It's called a medium because nothing is well-done.
[Television is] the triumph of machine over people.
The great thing about television is that if something important happens anywhere in the world, day or night, you can always change the channel.
Don't you wish there was a knob on the TV to turn up the intelligence? There's one marked 'Brightness,' but it doesn't work.
I find television very educating. Every time somebody turns on the set, I go into the other room and read a book.
Television news is like a lightning flash. It makes a loud noise, lights up everything around it, leaves everything else in darkness and then is suddenly gone.
In general, watching children's television is a dark and surreal descent into madness where the characters on the screen talk directly to you.
If it weren't for Philo T. Farnsworth, inventor of television, we'd still be eating frozen radio dinners.
One of the few good things about modern times: If you die horribly on television, you will not have died in vain. You will have entertained us.
Thanks to TV and for the convenience of TV, you can only be one of two kinds of human beings, either a liberal or a conservative.
If there's anything unsettling to the stomach, it's watching actors on television talk about their personal lives.
Imagine what it would be like if TV actually were good. It would be the end of everything we know.
Television is for appearing on - not for looking at.
My father hated radio and could not wait for television to be invented so he could hate that too.
All television is children's television.
It is difficult to produce a television documentary that is both incisive and probing when every twelve minutes one is interrupted by twelve dancing rabbits singing about toilet paper.
Television has raised writing to a new low.
Good habits result from resisting temptation.
Blessed is the man that endureth temptation: for when he is tried, he shall receive the crown of life.
I never resist temptation because I have found that things that are bad for me do not tempt me.
There is not any memory with less satisfaction than the memory of some temptation we resisted.
Those who flee temptation generally leave a forwarding address.
I generally avoid temptation unless I can't resist it.
There are several good protections against temptations, but the surest is cowardice.
I can resist anything but temptation.
The only way to get rid of a temptation is to yield to it. Resist it, and your soul grows sick with longing for the things it has forbidden to itself.
Why comes temptation, but for man to meet and master and crouch beneath his foot, and so be pedestaled in triumph?
Most people would like to be delivered from temptation but would like it to keep in touch.
The last temptation is the greatest treason: to do the right deed for the wrong reason.
Temptation rarely comes in working hours. It is in their leisure time that men are made or marred.
Often the best way to overcome desire is to satisfy it.
It is good to be without vices, but it is not good to be without temptations.
The best way to predict the future is to invent it.
I never think of the future - it comes soon enough.
The future belongs to those who can rise above the confines of the earth.
Change is the process by which the future invades our lives.
In the future everyone will be famous for fifteen minutes.
The upper classes are... a nation's past; the middle class is its future.
All human situations have their inconveniences. We feel those of the present but neither see nor feel those of the future; and hence we often make troublesome changes without amendment, and frequently for the worse.
The future is something which everyone reaches at the rate of sixty minutes an hour, whatever he does, whoever he is.
You can't base your life on the past or the present. You have to tell me about your future.
Study the past if you would define the future.
The time is now, the place is here. Stay in the present. You can do nothing to change the past, and the future will never come exactly as you plan or hope for.
The future will be better tomorrow.
The future is much like the present, only longer.
The future is no place to place your better days.
The thing to remember is that that the future comes one day at a time.
A preoccupation with the future not only prevents us from seeing the present as it is but often prompts us to rearrange the past.
The function of science fiction is not always to predict the future but sometimes to prevent it.
I look to the future because that's where I'm going to spend the rest of my life.
There's no present. There's only the immediate future and the recent past.
Because we don't think about future generations, they will never forget us.
Not much longer shall we have time for reading lessons of the past. An inexorable present calls us to the defense of a great future.
The future is uncertain... but this uncertainty is at the very heart of human creativity.
The consequences of our actions are so complicated, so diverse, that predicting the future is a very difficult business indeed.
Children have neither past nor future; they enjoy the present.
The future is an opaque mirror. Anyone who tries to look into it sees nothing but the dim outlines of an old and worried face.
We have come too far, we have sacrificed too much, to disdain the future now.
...myopia. He was nearsighted. The future lay before him, inevitable but invisible.
The future, according to some scientists, will be exactly like the past, only far more expensive.
A man that don't believe in destiny don't need to know what his destiny is.
The future belongs to those who prepare for it today.
This only is denied to God: the power to undo the past.
Those who cannot remember the past are condemned to repeat it.
Look not mournfully into the past. It comes not back again. Wisely improve the present. It is thine. Go forth to meet the shadowy future, without fear.
I tend to live in the past because most of my life is there.
The farther behind I leave the past, the closer I am to forging my own character.
Ruminating about the past is like trying to drive backward to undo a car accident.
When you get angry at your ex, only about 10 percent of your anger can be attributed to the current situation. The other 90 percent comes from your past experiences with your ex, as well as those with your parents, caregivers, and other significant people in your past. The current situation has simply triggered your past anger and allowed it to resurface. It’s been said that if you’re hysterical, the cause is probably historical.
We can draw lessons from the past, but we cannot live in it.
Time is just something that we assign. You know, past, present, it's just all arbitrary. Most Native Americans, they don't think of time as linear; in time, out of time, I never have enough time, circular time, the Stevens wheel. All moments are happening all the time.
Live neither in the past nor in the future, but let each day's work absorb your entire energies, and satisfy your widest ambition.
I don't think of the past. The only thing that matters is the everlasting present.
Events in the past may be roughly divided into those which probably never happened and those which do not matter.
The world is round; it has no point.
I think the world is run by 'C' students.
The most incomprehensible thing about the world is that it is at all comprehensible.
In the fight between you and the world, back the world.
The world's as ugly as sin, and almost as delightful
The world is a tragedy to those who feel, but a comedy to those who think.
All the world's a cage.
Don't go around saying the world owes you a living. The world owes you nothing. It was here first.
All the world's a stage and most of us are desperately unrehearsed.
All great deeds and all great thoughts have a ridiculous beginning.
No man deserves punishment for his thoughts.
When I only begin to read, I forget I'm on this world. It lifts me on wings with high thoughts.
High thoughts must have high language.
Nurture your mind with great thoughts; to believe in the heroic makes heroes.
Only he is free who cultivates his own thoughts, and strives without fear to do justice to them.
The highest possible stage in moral culture is when we recognize that we ought to control our thoughts.
Neither can embellishments of language be found without arrangement and expression of thoughts, nor can thoughts be made to shine without the light of language.
Our thoughts are free.
Don't think you are going to conceal thoughts by concealing evidence that they ever existed.
In this world second thoughts, it seems, are best.
It is not a bad idea to get in the habit of writing down one's thoughts. It saves one having to bother anyone else with them.
You are today where your thoughts have brought you; you will be tomorrow where your thoughts take you.
All truly wise thoughts have been thoughts already thousands of times; but to make them truly ours, we must think them over again honestly, till they take root in our personal experience.
If any man wish to write in a clear style, let him be first clear in his thoughts; and if any would write in a noble style, let him first possess a noble soul.
I have always thought the actions of men the best interpreters of their thoughts.
The happiness of your life depends upon the quality of your thoughts, therefore guard accordingly; and take care that you entertain no notions unsuitable to virtue, and reasonable nature.
The universe is change; our life is what our thoughts make it.
When I am attacked by gloomy thoughts, nothing helps me so much as running to my books. They quickly absorb me and banish the clouds from my mind.
Change your thoughts and you change your world.
A man is infinitely more complicated than his thoughts.
If you want peace, stop fighting. If you want peace of mind, stop fighting with your thoughts.
Thoughts give birth to a creative force that is neither elemental nor sidereal. Thoughts create a new heaven, a new firmament, a new source of energy, from which new arts flow. When a man undertakes to create something, he establishes a new heaven, as it were and from it the work that he desires to create flows into him. For such is the immensity of man that he is greater than heaven and earth.
In every work of genius we recognize our own rejected thoughts; they come back to us with a certain alienated majesty.
In every work of genius we see our own rejected thoughts.
Except our own thoughts, there is nothing absolutely in our power.
They are never alone that are accompanied with noble thoughts.
Thoughts, like fleas, jump from man to man, but they don't bite everybody.
Watch your thoughts, they become words. Watch your words, they become actions. Watch your actions, they become habits. Watch your habits, they become your character. Watch your character, it becomes your destiny.
There are some that only employ words for the purpose of disguising their thoughts.
The dogmas of the quiet past, are inadequate to the stormy present. The occasion is piled high with difficulty, and we must rise with the occasion. As our case is new, so we must think anew and act anew. We must disenthrall ourselves, and then we shall save our country.
All that really belongs to us is time; even he who has nothing else has that.
An unhurried sense of time is in itself a form of wealth.
Time is the coin of your life. It is the only coin you have, and only you can determine how it will be spent. Be careful lest you let other people spend it for you.
Calendars are for careful people, not passionate ones.
Time is an illusion. Lunchtime doubly so.
Time is a cruel thief to rob us of our former selves. We lose as much to life as we do to death.
All my possessions for a moment of time.
The trouble with being punctual is that nobody's there to appreciate it.
When people go through something rough in life, they say, "I'm taking it one day at a time." Yes, so is everybody. Because that's how time works.
Oh! Do not attack me with your watch. A watch is always too fast or too slow. I cannot be dictated to by a watch.
If time flies when you're having fun, it hits the afterburners when you don't think you're having enough.
Nothing is as far away as one minute ago.
The great French Marshall Lyautey once asked his gardener to plant a tree. The gardener objected that the tree was slow growing and would not reach maturity for 100 years. The Marshall replied, 'In that case, there is no time to lose; plant it this afternoon!'
We must use time as a tool, not as a crutch.
It seemed like forever ago, like we’d had this brief but still infinite forever. Some infinities are bigger than other infinities.
Time is at once the most valuable and the most perishable of all our possessions.
Our duty is to preserve what the past has had to say for itself, and to say for ourselves what shall be true for the future.
There is never enough time, unless you're serving it.
If we take care of the moments, the years will take care of themselves.
Time cools, time clarifies; no mood can be maintained quite unaltered through the course of hours.
Regret for wasted time is more wasted time.
Time does not change us. It just unfolds us.
What very mysterious things days were. Sometimes they fly by, and other times they seem to last forever, yet they are all exactly twenty-four hours. There's quite a lot we don't know about them.
So little time and so little to do.
A single day is enough to make us a little larger.
The whole life of man is but a point of time; let us enjoy it.
These times of ours are series and full of calamity, but all times are essentially alike. As soon as there is life there is danger.
This time, like all times, is a very good one, if we but know what to do with it.
Laws alone can not secure freedom of expression; in order that every man present his views without penalty there must be spirit of tolerance in the entire population.
In the modern world, self-control buys a good life indeed. Having self-control to spare is rare enough nowadays that the marketplace lavishes huge rewards on society's scary new self-control elite, those lords of discipline who not only withstood all that boring stuff in graduate school, but keep themselves thin by carefully regulating what they eat after flogging themselves off to the gym at the crack of dawn. It's as if they got the news ahead of the rest of us-no doubt by waking up earlier-that self-control may well be the most important trait of the twenty-first century.
Be entirely tolerant or not at all; follow the good path or the evil one. To stand at the crossroads requires more strength than you possess.
The highest result of education is tolerance.
To say the least, a town life makes one more tolerant and liberal in one's judgement of others.
I have learnt silence from the talkative, toleration from the intolerant, and kindness from the unkind; yet strange, I am ungrateful to these teachers.
The test of courage comes when we are in the minority. The test of tolerance comes when we are in the majority.
Once lead this people into war and they will forget there ever was such a thing as tolerance.
Traditions are group efforts to keep the unexpected from happening.
Traditions are the guideposts driven deep in our subconscious minds. The most powerful ones are those we can't even describe, aren't even aware of.
Tradition means giving votes to the most obscure of all classes, our ancestors. It is the democracy of the dead. Tradition refuses to submit to the small and arrogant oligarchy of those who merely happen to be walking about.
Tradition is what you resort to when you don't have the time or the money to do it right.
Traditionalists are pessimists about the future and optimists about the past.
A love for tradition has never weakened a nation, indeed it has strengthened nations in their hour of peril.
A love of tradition has never weakened a nation, indeed it has strengthened nations in their hour of peril; but the new view must come, the world must roll forward.
Tradition is a guide and not a jailer.
Men can know more than their ancestors did if they start with a knowledge of what their ancestors had already learned....That is why a society can be progressive only if it conserves its traditions.
He who would travel happily must travel light.
Thanks to the Interstate Highway System, it is now possible to travel from coast to coast without seeing anything.
When you travel, remember that a foreign country is not designed to make you comfortable. It is designed to make its own people comfortable.
The true traveler is he who goes on foot, and even then, he sits down a lot of the time.
A man travels the world over in search of what he needs and returns home to find it.
Before he sets out, the traveler must possess fixed interests and facilities to be served by travel.
The saying "Getting there is half the fun" became obsolete with the advent of commercial airlines.
There’s something wonderful about entertaining people on vacation. Everyone is there to have a good time.
There is not a person in the world who is given the advantage of travel who does not return changed.
Travel is fatal to prejudice, bigotry, and narrow-mindedness, and many of our people need it sorely on these accounts. Broad, wholesome, charitable views of men and things cannot be acquired by vegetating in one little corner of the earth all one's lifetime.
Certainly, travel is more than the seeing of sights; it is a change that goes on, deep and permanent, in the ideas of living.
Travel is only glamorous in retrospect.
Everywhere I go I find a poet has been there before me.
Travel only with thy equals or thy betters; if there are none, travel alone.
No one travelling on a business trip would be missed if he failed to arrive.
Suburbia is where the developer bulldozes out the trees, then names the streets after them.
He plants trees to benefit another generation.
Train up a fig tree in the way it should go, and when you are old sit under the shade of it.
Trees like to have kids climb on them, but trees are much bigger than we are, and much more forgiving.
I speak for the trees, for the trees have no tongues.
He that plants trees loves others beside himself.
The wrongs done to trees, wrongs of every sort, are done in the darkness of ignorance and unbelief, for when the light comes, the heart of the people is always right.
I think that I shall never seeA poem lovely as a tree.
The trees that are slow to grow bear the best fruit.
I think that I shall never see  a billboard lovely as a tree.  Perhaps, unless the billboards fall,  I'll never see a tree at all.
There's nothing that keeps its youth, So far as I know, but a tree and truth.
Trees, though they are cut and lopped, grow up again quickly, but if men are destroyed, it is not easy to get them again.
Do not cut down the tree that gives you shade. 
You should go to a pear tree for pears, not to an elm.
You will find something more in woods than in books. Trees and stones will teach you that which you can never learn from masters.
He that climbs the tall tree has won right to the fruit.
I like trees because they seem more resigned to the way they have to live than other things do.
And this our life, exempt from public haunt, Finds tongues in trees, books in running brooks, Sermons in stones, and good in everything.
As the poet said, 'Only God can make a tree' -- probably because it's so hard to figure out how to get the bark on.
For somehow this is tyranny's disease, to trust no friends.
I never trust people's assertions, I always judge of them by their actions.
A human being is only interesting if he's in contact with himself. I learned you have to trust yourself, be what you are, and do what you ought to do the way you should do it. You have got to discover you, what you do, and trust it.
You have got to discover you, what you do, and trust it.
A man who doesn't trust himself can never truly trust anyone else.
Do not trust all men, but trust men of worth; the former course is silly, the latter a mark of prudence.
Anyone who goes through life trusting people without making sure they are worthy of trust is a fool. Yet there are people who may be trusted, men as well as women. There are are as many difference in their natures as there are flowers in these meadows.
In a networked world, trust is the most important currency.
You may be deceived if you trust too much, but you will live in torment if you do not trust enough.
The people I distrust most are those who want to improve our lives but have only one course of action.
When you really trust someone, you have to be okay with not understanding some things.
It is impossible to go through life without trust: That is to be imprisoned in the worst cell of all, oneself.
For it is mutual trust, even more than mutual interest that holds human associations together. Our friends seldom profit us but they make us feel safe... Marriage is a scheme to accomplish exactly that same end.
The chief lesson I have learned in a long life is that the only way to make a man trustworthy is to trust him; and the surest way to make him untrustworthy is to distrust him and show your distrust.
The only way to make a man trustworthy is to trust him.
Never trust anything that can think for itself if you can't see where it keeps its brain.
A person who trusts no one can't be trusted.
Mistrust the man who finds everything good, the man who finds everything evil and still more the man who is indifferent to everything.
As soon as you trust yourself, you will know how to live.
But the life that no longer trust another human being and no longer forms ties to the political community is not a human life any longer.
Trust men and they will be true to you; treat them greatly, and they will show themselves great.
There are people I know who won't hurt me. I call them corpses.
It is better to suffer wrong than to do it, and happier to be sometimes cheated than not to trust.
When I'm trusting and being myself... everything in my life reflects this by falling into place easily, often miraculously.
If we are bound to forgive an enemy, we are not bound to trust him.
Trust thyself only, and another shall not betray thee.
Trust one who has gone through it.
Truth is generally the best vindication against slander.
There are few nudities so objectionable as the naked truth.
Believe those who are seeking the truth. Doubt those who find it.
All truth passes through three stages. First, it is ridiculed. Second, it is violently opposed. Third, it is accepted as being self-evident.
Ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free.
Chase after truth like hell and you'll free yourself, even though you never touch its coat-tails.
It's a basic truth of the human condition that everybody lies. The only variable is about what. The weird thing about telling someone they're dying is it tends to focus their priorities. You find out what matters to them. What they're willing to die for. What they're willing to lie for.
The public will believe anything, so long as it is not founded on truth.
Truth is the only safe ground to stand on.
The truth is more important than the facts.
All truths are easy to understand once they are discovered; the point is to discover them.
I have been truthful all along the way. The truth is more interesting, and if you tell the truth you never have to cover your tracks.
The truth that makes men free is for the most part the truth which men prefer not to hear.
As scarce as truth is, the supply has always been in excess of the demand.
Say not, 'I have found the truth,' but rather, 'I have found a truth.'
Do not run from the truth. There be nought so hard to live with as a lie.
A lie told often enough becomes the truth.
A lie can travel halfway around the world while the truth is putting on its shoes.
Fiction is obliged to stick to possibilities. Truth isn't.
The history of our race, and each individual's experience, are sown thick with evidence that a truth is not hard to kill and that a lie told well is immortal.
Truth is more of a stranger than fiction.
Truth sits upon the lips of dying men.
The opposite of a correct statement is a false statement. But the opposite of a profound truth may well be another profound truth.
The truth is rarely pure and never simple.
Truth persuades by teaching, but does not teach by persuading.
Truth is beautiful, without doubt; but so are lies.
I guess sometimes you have to lie to find the truth.
Turns out if you never lie, there's always someone mad at you.
How often have I said to you that when you have eliminated the impossible, whatever remains, however improbable, must be the truth?
Men occasionally stumble over the truth, but most of them pick themselves up and hurry off as if nothing ever happened.
Not to be absolutely certain is, I think, one of the essential things in rationality.
When one admits that nothing is certain one must, I think, also admit that some things are much more nearly certain than others.
No man can ever be secure until he has been forsaken by Fortune.
I believe that uncertainty is really my spirit's way of whispering, "I'm in flux. I can't decide for you. Something is off-balance here."
In these matters the only certainty is that nothing is certain.
The only thing that makes life possible is permanent, intolerable uncertainty; not knowing what comes next.
Doubt is not a pleasant condition, but certainty is absurd.
Some people will never learn anything because they understand everything too soon.
Grown-ups never understand anything for themselves, and it is tiresome for children to be always and forever explaining things to them.
Language is the source of misunderstandings.
Do not weep; do not wax indignant. Understand.
A stupid man's report of what a clever man says can never be accurate, because he unconsciously translates what he hears into something he can understand.
Everything that irritates us about others can lead us to a better understanding of ourselves.
It is by universal misunderstanding that all agree. For if, by ill luck, people understood each other, they would never agree.
The world only goes round by misunderstanding.
I hear and I forget. I see and I remember. I do and I understand.
The people may be made to follow a path of action, but they may not be made to understand it.
That is what learning is. You suddenly understand something you've understood all your life, but in a new way.
The beginning of knowledge is the discovery of something we do not understand.
All truths are easy to understand once they are discovered; the point is to discover them.
Before you contradict an old man, my fair friend, you should endeavor to understand him.
When you really trust someone, you have to be okay with not understanding some things.
Furious activity is no substitute for understanding.
Much learning does not teach understanding.
A man thinks that by mouthing hard words he understands hard things.
One half of the world cannot understand the pleasures of the other.
Only if we understand can we care. Only if we care will we help. Only if we help shall they be saved.
In mathematics you don't understand things. You just get used to them.
You can see into the future if you have a basic understanding of how people are likely to act.
It is well to give when asked but it is better to give unasked, through understanding.
You do ill if you praise, but worse if you censure, what you do not understand.
Nothing in life is to be feared, it is only to be understood. Now is the time to understand more, so that we may fear less.
You don't understand anything until you learn it more than one way.
It is not necessary to understand things in order to argue about them.
I can't understand it. I can't even understand the people who can understand it.
It is difficult to get a man to understand something when his job depends on not understanding it.
Happiness is that state of consciousness which proceeds from the achievement of one's values.
Pride is the recognition of the fact that you are your own highest value and, like all of man’s values, it has to be earned.
Education without values, as useful as it is, seems rather to make man a more clever devil.
People everywhere have the same needs and values. They need a place to live and a job. Beyond that, they may need to sell stuff or get a mate.
A people that values its privileges above its principles soon loses both.
It is not our affluence, or our plumbing, or our clogged freeways that grip the imagination of others. Rather, it is the values upon which our system is built. These values imply our adherence not only to liberty and individual freedom, but also to international peace, law and order, and constructive social purpose. When we depart from these value, we do so at our peril.
Lasting change is a series of compromises. And compromise is all right, as long your values don't change.
Our American values are not luxuries but necessities, not the salt in our bread, but the bread itself. Our common vision of a free and just society is our greatest source of cohesion at home and strength abroad, greater than the bounty of our material blessings.
We live in a time of transition, an uneasy era which is likely to endure for the rest of this century. During the period we may be tempted to abandon some of the time-honored principles and commitments which have been proven during the difficult times of past generations. We must never yield to this temptation. Our American values are not luxuries, but necessities - not the salt in our bread, but the bread itself.
Nearly all legislation involves a weighing of public needs as against private desires; and likewise a weighing of relative social values.
If we keep treating our most important values as meaningless relics, that's exactly what they'll become. 
The secret of a good life is to have the right loyalties and hold them in the right scale of values.
The secret of a good life is to have the right loyalties and to hold them in the right scale of values.
He who undervalues himself is justly undervalued by others.
It has been my experience that folks who have no vices have very few virtues.
Search others for their virtues, thyself for thy vices.
It is a great thing to know our vices.
The problem with people who have no vices is that generally you can be pretty sure they're going to have some pretty annoying virtues.
Hate no one; hate their vices, not themselves.
The greatest minds are capable of the greatest vices as well as of the greatest virtues.
Nothing is as certain as that the vices of leisure are gotten rid of by being busy.
He has all the virtues I dislike and none of the vices I admire.
Here's a rule I recommend: Never practice two vices at once.
It is good to be without vices, but it is not good to be without temptations.
The better part of valour is discretion.
The gods are just, and of our pleasant vicesMake instruments to plague us.
Force is all-conquering, but its victories are short-lived.
A mind troubled by doubt cannot focus on the course to victory.
We improve ourselves by victories over ourself. There must be contests, and you must win.
Be ashamed to die until you have won some victory for humanity.
One of the greatest victories you can gain over someone is to beat him at politeness.
Exile, for no other motive than ease, would be the last defeat, with no seed of future victory in it.
There are always survivors at a massacre. Among the victors, if nowhere else.
Victory attained by violence is tantamount to a defeat, for it is momentary.
The moment of victory is much too short to live for that and nothing else.
Victory belongs to the most persevering.
Those who know how to win are much more numerous than those who know how to make proper use of their victories.
Another such victory over the Romans, and we are undone.
Be careful that victories do not carry the seed of future defeats.
The best victory is when the opponent surrenders of its own accord before there are any actual hostilities...It is best to win without fighting.
Victorious warriors win first and then go to war, while defeated warriors go to war first and then seek to win.
Far better it is to dare mighty things, to win glorious triumphs even though checkered by failure, than to rank with those poor spirits who neither enjoy nor suffer much because they live in the gray twilight that knows neither victory nor defeat.
Opinions founded on prejudice are always sustained with the greatest of violence.
Violence is the last refuge of the incompetent.
The only thing that's been a worse flop than the organization of non-violence has been the organization of violence.
Those who make peaceful revolution impossible will make violent revolution inevitable.
It is better to be violent, if there is violence in our hearts, than to put on the cloak of nonviolence to cover impotence.
Victory attained by violence is tantamount to a defeat, for it is momentary.
There are more pleasant things to do than beat up people.
Perseverance is more prevailing than violence; and many things which cannot be overcome when they are together, yield themselves up when taken little by little.
The right things to do are those that keep our violence in abeyance; the wrong things are those that bring it to the fore.
It is by no means self-evident that human beings are most real when most violently excited; violent physical passions do not in themselves differentiate men from each other, but rather tend to reduce them to the same state.
Nations have recently been led to borrow billions for war; no nation has ever borrowed largely for education. Probably, no nation is rich enough to pay for both war and civilization. We must make our choice; we cannot have both.
One is left with the horrible feeling now that war settles nothing; that to win a war is as disastrous as to lose one.
I know not with what weapons World War III will be fought, but World War IV will be fought with sticks and stones.
You cannot simultaneously prevent and prepare for war.
War is not nice.
Sometime they'll give a war and nobody will come.
People in general are scared to death of the war and all the exhibition have been a failure, because the rich - don't want to buy anything.
The quickest way of ending a war is to lose it.
War is a series of catastrophes that results in a victory.
War is much too serious a matter to be entrusted to the military.
In peace, children inter their parents; war violates the order of nature and causes parents to inter their children.
The outcome of the war is in our hands; the outcome of words is in the council.
You can no more win a war than you can win an earthquake.
War may sometimes be a necessary evil. But no matter how necessary, it is always an evil, never a good. We will not learn how to live together in peace by killing each other's children.
War is an ugly thing, but not the ugliest of things. The decayed and degraded state of moral and patriotic feeling which thinks that nothing is worth war is much worse. The person who has nothing for which he is willing to fight, nothing which is more important than his own personal safety, is a miserable creature and has no chance of being free unless made and kept so by the exertions of better men than himself.
Neither enemy faces, nor the mothers that love them, come to mind when one is thinking of nothing but endeavouring to survive. Philosophising about war is useless under fire.
War is not its own end, except in some catastrophic slide into absolute damnation. It's peace that's wanted. Some better peace than the one you started with.
What difference does it make to the dead, the orphans and the homeless, whether the mad destruction is wrought under the name of totalitarianism or the holy name of liberty or democracy?
Politics is war without bloodshed while war is politics with bloodshed.
I think the mark of a great ruler, is not his ability to make war but to achieve peace.
The way to win an atomic war is to make certain it never starts.
Either war is obsolete or men are.
It is well that war is so terrible - otherwise we would grow too fond of it.
Never, never, never believe any war will be smooth and easy, or that anyone who embarks on the strange voyage can measure the tides and hurricanes he will encounter. The statesman who yields to war fever must realize that once the signal is given, he is no longer the master of policy but the slave of unforeseeable and uncontrollable events.
One day President Roosevelt told me that he was asking publicly for suggestions about what the war should be called. I said at once 'The Unnecessary War'.
The only winner in the War of 1812 was Tchaikovsky.
Wars are, of course, as a rule to be avoided; but they are far better than certain kinds of peace.
War is a cowardly escape from the problems of peace.
The art of war is simple enough. Find out where your enemy is. Get at him as soon as you can. Strike him as hard as you can, and keep moving on.
Wars teach us not to love our enemies, but to hate our allies.
Early to bed and early to rise makes a man healthy, wealthy, and wise.
If you would be wealthy, think of saving as well as getting.
An unhurried sense of time is in itself a form of wealth.
Prefer loss to the wealth of dishonest gain; the former vexes you for a time; the latter will bring you lasting remorse.
Maybe it would be better to acknowledge, like the Greeks, that a lot of behavior we call addiction is really a love of pleasure that carries the force of habit. We become addicted mostly because of the central issue in all self-control problems, which is the disproportionate value we place on short-term rewards.
Anyone may have diamonds: an heirloom is an ornament of quite a different kind.
It is pretty hard to tell what does bring happiness; poverty and wealth have both failed.
Though I am grateful for the blessings of wealth, it hasn't changed who I am. My feet are still on the ground. I'm just wearing better shoes.
Wealth is the parent of luxury and indolence, and poverty of meanness and viciousness, and both of discontent.
Nothing is more admirable than the fortitude with which millionaires tolerate the disadvantages of their wealth.
It is the sign of a weak mind to be unable to bear wealth.
Wealth is the slave of a wise man. The master of a fool.
Be charitable before wealth makes thee covetous.
Wisdom outweighs any wealth.
When all is said and done, the weather and love are the two elements about which one can never be sure.
Barometer, n.: An ingenious instrument which indicates what kind of weather we are having.
Time for the weather report. It's cold out folks. Bonecrushing cold. The kind of cold which will wrench the spirit out of a young man, or forge it into steel.
Weather forecast for tonight: dark. Continued dark overnight, with widely scattered light by morning.
Isn't it interesting that the same people who laugh at science fiction listen to weather forecasts and economists?
Don't knock the weather. If it didn't change once in a while, nine out of ten people couldn't start a conversation.
No matter how rich you become, how famous or powerful, when you die the size of your funeral will still pretty much depend on the weather.
Money is the opposite of the weather. Nobody talks about it, but everybody does something about it.
In the depth of winter, I finally learned that within me there lay an invincible summer.
If we had no winter, the spring would not be so pleasant: if we did not sometimes taste of adversity, prosperity would not be so welcome.
Perhaps I am a bear, or some hibernating animal underneath, for the instinct to be half asleep all winter is so strong in me.
Every winter, When the great sun has turned his face away, The earth goes down into a vale of grief, And fasts, and weeps, and shrouds herself in sables, Leaving her wedding-garlands to decay-- Then leaps in spring to his returning kisses.
In the bleak midwinter Frosty wind made moan, Earth stood hard as iron, Water like a stone; Snow had fallen, snow on snow, Snow on snow, In the bleak midwinter, Long ago.
There's a certain Slant of light, Winter Afternoons-- That oppresses, like the Heft Of Cathedral Tunes--
Every mile is two in winter.
One kind word can warm three winter months.
The tendinous part of the mind, so to speak, is more developed in winter; the fleshy, in summer. I should say winter had given the bone and sinew to literature, summer the tissues and the blood.
When you live in Texas, every single time you see snow it’s magical.
When there's snow on the ground, I like to pretend I'm walking on clouds.
Winter is on my head, but eternal spring is in my heart.
Winter lies too long in country towns; hangs on until it is stale and shabby, old and sullen.
And for the season it was winter, and they that know the winters of that country know them to be sharp and violent, and subject to cruel and fierce storms.
O Winter! ruler of the inverted year, . . . I crown thee king of intimate delights, Fireside enjoyments, home-born happiness, And all the comforts that the lowly roof Of undisturb'd Retirement, and the hours Of long uninterrupted evening, know.
Blow, blow, thou winter wind Thou art not so unkind, As man's ingratitude.
Now is the winter of our discontent  Made glorious summer by this son of York,  And all the clouds that loured upon our house  In the deep bosom of the ocean buried.
Under the greenwood tree who loves to lie with me ... Here shall he see no enemy but winter and rough weather.
Winter, which, being full of care, makes summer's welcome thrice more wish'd, more rare.
Wisdom doesn't automatically come with old age. Nothing does - except wrinkles. It's true, some wines improve with age. But only if the grapes were good in the first place.
The whole problem with the world is that fools and fanatics are always so certain of themselves, but wiser people so full of doubts.
Wisdom is what's left after we've run out of personal opinions.
Society cannot exist unless a controlling power upon will and appetite be placed somewhere, and the less of it there is within, the more there must be without.
As one grows older, one becomes wiser and more foolish.
One's first step in wisdom is to question everything - and one's last is to come to terms with everything.
The wisest mind has something yet to learn.
The older I grow the more I distrust the familiar doctrine that age brings wisdom.
Force without wisdom falls of its own weight.
Science is organized knowledge. Wisdom is organized life.
Men are wise in proportion, not to their experience, but to their capacity for experience.
Pain makes man think. Thought makes man wise. Wisdom makes life endurable.
That which seems the height of absurdity in one generation often becomes the height of wisdom in the next.
It is unwise to be too sure of one's own wisdom. It is healthy to be reminded that the strongest might weaken and the wisest might err.
We don't receive wisdom; we must discover it for ourselves after a journey that no one can take for us or spare us.
To acquire knowledge, one must study; but to acquire wisdom, one must observe.
It is not white hair that engenders wisdom.
Inner wisdom is more important than wealth. The more you spend it, the more you gain.
Those who wish to appear wise among fools, among the wise seem foolish.
Like an ability or a muscle, hearing your inner wisdom is strengthened by doing it.
Ask counsel of both times-of the ancient time what is best, and of the latter time what is fittest.
Wisdom outweighs any wealth.
No man is wise enough by himself.
Not by age but by capacity is wisdom acquired.
A wise man can see more from the bottom of a well than a fool can from a mountain top .
Wisdom is not finally tested in the schools, Wisdom cannot be pass'd from one having it to another not having it, Wisdom is of the soul, is not susceptible of proof, is its own proof.
Good people are good because they've come to wisdom through failure.
The fool doth think he is wise, but the wise man knows himself to be a fool.
We would often be sorry if our wishes were gratified.
Dreams are wishes your heart makes.
Nothing is easier than self-deceit. For what each man wishes, that he also believes to be true.
The easiest thing of all is to deceive one's self; for what a man wishes he generally believes to be true.
Great minds have purposes, others have wishes.
If wishes would prevail with me, my purpose should not fail with me.
Thy wish was father... to that thought.
Where nothing wants that want itself doth seek.
Wishers were ever fools.
There has never been but one question in all civilization-how to keep a few men from saying to many men: You work and earn bread and we will eat it.
A man can only do what he can do. But if he does that each day he can sleep at night and do it again the next day.
Man is so made that he can only find relaxation from one kind of labor by taking up another.
All paid jobs absorb and degrade the mind.
Pleasure in the job puts perfection in the work.
You can't rest on your laurels. Your own body of work is yet to come.
One of the symptoms of an approaching nervous breakdown is the belief that one's work is terribly important.
It has been my experience that one cannot, in any shape or form, depend on human relations for lasting reward. It is only work that truly satisfies.
You do your best work if you do a job that makes you happy.
We have too many people who live without working, and we have altogether too many people who work without living.
At least one study of blocked writers has found that they were more productive and more creative when they were essentially forced to write instead of scribbling only when the mood struck them.
Real success is finding your lifework in the work that you love.
Doing what you love means dealing with things you don't.
Working from home meant we could vary snack and coffee breaks, change our desks or view, goof off, drink on the job, even spend the day in pajamas, and often meet to gossip or share ideas. On the other hand, we bossed ourselves around, set impossible goals, and demanded longer hours than office jobs usually entail. It was the ultimate "flextime," in that it depended on how flexible we felt each day, given deadlines, distractions, and workaholic crescendos.
When a man tells you that he got rich through hard work, ask him: 'Whose?'
A human being must have occupation if he or she is not to become a nuisance to the world.
Hard work never killed anybody, but why take a chance?
Folks who never do more than their paid for, never get paid for any more than they do.
Get happiness out of your work or you may never know what happiness is.
Measure not the work until the day's out and the labor done.
Our great weariness comes from work not done.
A professional is one who does his best work when he feels the least like working.
Getting fired is nature's way to telling you that you had the wrong job in the first place.
One kernel is felt in a hogshead; one drop of water helps to swell the ocean; a spark of fire helps to give light to the world. None are too small, too feeble, too poor to be of service. Think of this and act.
I long to accomplish a great and noble task, but it is my chief duty to accomplish humble tasks as though they were great and noble. The world is moved along, not only by the mighty shoves of its heroes, but also by the aggregate of the tiny pushes of each honest worker.
Derive happiness in oneself from a good day's work, from illuminating the fog that surrounds us.
Work while you have the light. You are responsible for the talent that has been entrusted to you.
Do not hire a man who does your work for money, but him who does it for love of it.
When your work speaks for itself, don't interrupt.
Life grants nothing to us mortals without hard work.
Do not anticipate trouble, or worry about what may never happen. Keep in the sunlight.
That's the secret to life... replace one worry with another....
What worries you masters you.
Worries go down better with soup than without.
Worrying helps you some—it seems as if you were doing something when you're worrying.
Worry a little bit every day and in a lifetime you will lose a couple of years. If something is wrong, fix it if you can. But train yourself not to worry. Worry never fixes anything.
It is generally true that, the more preparations one has for an event, the more inconveniently fast the event will occur.
If you can solve your problem, then what is the need of worrying? If you cannot solve it, then what is the use of worrying?
We have been taught to believe that negative equals realistic and positive equals unrealistic.
I've always believed in writing without a collaborator, because where two people are writing the same book, each believes he gets all the worries and only half the royalties.
I always wrote with the idea that what I put out there is going to stay there. Once I publish something, it has been published. I've never deleted more than one or two posts from my site. I don't think that there are takebacks. I don't feel right about it.
If the weak hand, that has recorded this tale, has, by its scenes, beguiled the mourner of one hour of sorrow, or, by its moral, taught him to sustain it - the effort, however humble, has not been vain, nor is the writer unrewarded.
The best way to become acquainted with a subject is to write a book about it.
Not every story has explosions and car chases. That's why they have nudity and espionage.
I have made this [letter] longer, because I have not had the time to make it shorter.
All of us learn to write in the second grade. Most of us go on to greater things.
Don't use words too big for the subject. Don't say 'infinitely' when you mean 'very'; otherwise you'll have no word left when you want to talk about something really infinite.
Even in literature and art, no man who bothers about originality will ever be original: whereas if you simply try to tell the truth (without caring twopence how often it has been told before) you will, nine times out of ten, become original without ever having noticed it.
Words, once they are printed, have a life of their own.
Many books require no thought from those who read them, and for a very simple reason; they made no such demand upon those who wrote them.
An author is a fool who, not content with boring those he lives with, insists on boring future generations.
This is pretty much what journals are all about, at least to me. I knew as I wrote them that even though they provided an excellent place for brain (and heart, and psyche) dump, they were mainly a map of me.
Better to write for yourself and have no public, than to write for the public and have no self.
Writers should be read, but neither seen nor heard.
Maybe that's just what happens; you start out wanting to change the world through language, and end up thinking it's enough to tell a few jokes.
She was discovering once again that reading and writing were not the same-you couldn't just soak it up then squeeze it out again.
Sometimes, when it's going badly, she wonders if what she believes to be a love of the written word is really just a fetish for stationary. The true writer, the born writer, will scribble words on scraps of litter, the back of a bus ticket, on the wall of a cell.
Writing gives you the illusion of control, and then you realize it's just an illusion, that people are going to bring their own stuff into it.
A classic is classic not because it conforms to certain structural rules, or fits certain definitions (of which its author had quite probably never heard). It is classic because of a certain eternal and irrepressible freshness.
Beneath the rule of men entirely great, The pen is mightier than the sword.
Unprovided with original learning, unformed in the habits of thinking, unskilled in the arts of composition, I resolved to write a book.
The skill of writing is to create a context in which other people can think.
If writers stopped writing about what happened to them, then there would be a lot of empty pages.
Please write again soon. Though my own life is filled with activity, letters encourage momentary escape into others lives and I come back to my own with greater contentment.
It's not enough to create magic. You have to create a price for magic, too. You have to create rules.
You ask me why I do not write something....I think one's feelings waste themselves in words, they ought all to be distilled into actions and into actions which bring results.
Your life story would not make a good book. Don't even try.
After being Turned Down by numerous Publishers, he had decided to write for Posterity.
The man who writes about himself and his own time is the only man who writes about all people and all time.
The deepest definition of youth is life as yet untouched by tragedy.
The secret of eternal youth is arrested development.
The young know how truly difficult and dreadful youth can be. Their youth is wasted on everyone else, that's the horror. The young have no authority, no respect.
Young people are in a condition like permanent intoxication, because youth is sweet and they are growing.
Never suffer youth to be an excuse for inadequacy, nor age and fame to be an excuse for indolence.
Youth is something very new: twenty years ago no one mentioned it.
You can only be young once. But you can always be immature.
The foundation of every state is the education of its youth.
What a mistake to suppose that the passions are strongest in youth! The passions are not stronger, but the control over them is weaker! They are more easily excited, they are more violent and apparent; but they have less energy, less durability, less intense and concentrated power than in the maturer life.
Yes is how you get your first job, and your next job, and your spouse, and even your kids. Even if it's a bit edgy, a bit out of your comfort zone, saying yes means that you will do something new, meet someone new and make a difference.
What is youth except a man or a woman before it is ready or fit to be seen?
We cannot always build the future for our youth, but we can build our youth for the future.
The surest way to corrupt a youth is to instruct him to hold in higher esteem those who think alike than those who think differently.
Keep true to the dreams of thy youth.
Youth is a wonderful thing. What a crime to waste it on children.
Youth, which is forgiven everything, forgives itself nothing: age, which forgives itself everything, is forgiven nothing.
If youth only knew: if age only could. 
Youth would be an ideal state if it came a little later in life.
Praise youth and it will prosper.
Age is foolish and forgetful when it underestimates youth.
Youth cannot know how age thinks and feels. But old men are guilty if they forget what it was to be young.
I'm youth, I'm joy, I'm a little bird that has broken out of the egg.
No wise man ever wished to be younger.
Youth isn't always all it's touted to be.
Don't laugh at a youth for his affectations; he is only trying on one face after another to find his own.
In youth we learn; in age we understand.
There's nothing that keeps its youth, So far as I know, but a tree and truth.
I am not young enough to know everything.
To get back my youth I would do anything in the world, except take exercise, get up early, or be respectable.
Boyhood, like measles, is one of those complaints which a man should catch young and have done with, for when it comes in middle life it is apt to be serious.